ШТООООООО?

The Fallen Sky

IT WAS HOT. Picard could almost feel the sun pressing in on him. It was an illusion, of course. Knowledge of the conditions outside the Darwin gave his imagination leave to insist that it was hot here--against the reality of the ship's climate-controlled bridge.

He leaned forward in his saddle at the Operations station as the Horta pilot at his right moved her fingerlike rocky extrusions over her console. As the vessel finally lifted from the ocean, kindling temperature was reached, at which point waterspouts grew into actual tornadoes and heavy swells began to form.

"Picard to Riker," Picard murmured.

"Riker here."

"We are fully operational, and rising through the atmosphere."

"Glad to hear it, Captain."

From an altitude of ten thousand kilometers, the world below became a flat white plain. Picard realized that he was staring at streamers of warm mist rising over millions of square kilometers of ocean, pushing gently--ever so gently, at first--outward and outward from the place he had just left. A hundred thousand kilometers higher, Picard thought he could distinguish the outline of the Great Scott Sea's nearer shore.

Far up the inner hull, just barely visible, was a thin scratch marking the path taken by the old world across a lake and a forest. At least, he thought it was visible, without the aid of magnification; but the longer he looked, the harder it was to see, and he began to wonder if the destruction he had witnessed in real time, through subspace channels, might not yet be visible without the probe because the light now reaching the Darwin from the inner surface was still several minutes old. A quick mental calculation told him that more than enough time had passed, that the scratch should be visible to him; but like so much else in Dyson, it was swallowed by Dyson's immensity.

He called up a telescopic view and ... and there it was: The core had stretched like an egg and broken, leaving behind a yolk of gold and liquid platinum the size of Lake Superior. Behind the core, vast splashes of atmosphere were crashing back again upon the land, cooking deposits of colorless methane into clouds of black sugar. The sky, in that direction, rained caramel and microdiamonds.

Guinan had come to the bridge. She left the lift, came to his side, and stood there gazing at the viewscreen; her usual contemplative expression was replaced now by awe. "The question," she said, as if reading his thoughts, "comes down to the old sin of pride."

Picard looked at her quizzically.

"You wanted to believe we could save Dyson, that we could change its course," Guinan continued, "but that belief, no matter how well-intentioned, turns out to have been rooted in the old conceits of pride and hope. You were right to think of the Darwin as little more than an intruding virus here. We are saviors of nothing. The Dyson Sphere was not built for us, does not operate by our standards of right and wrong, and so long as we stay out of the way and do not become an irritating little virus, Dyson does not give a damn about us."

"I guess that shows us all where we stand," said Captain Dalen from her command station.

Picard gave net an icv stare and said, "A. little to one side, I presume."

They were two million kilometers high and the bridge screen's main view was panning sideways across the sun. It does look like a sea urchin! Picard thought; and Captain Dalen, apparently taking Guinan's reprimand at face value--do not become an irritating little virus--ordered the pilot to give the sun a wide berth with the Darwin.

Aboard the Enterprise, sitting at the command station, Riker uplinked a viewfeed from the Darwin's main telescope. The officers on the bridge's port side cupped their hands over their eyes as bright light suddenly suffused the area.

Riker squinted at the viewscreen. The grapplers-- or, rather, what he had assumed all along to have been grapplers--were still drawing energy from the sun. By now they glowed so fiercely that it was hard to imagine why they had not turned whole oceans into scalding vapor; yet the machines remained surrounded by tropical islands and rainforests that were slowly disappearing under sheets of ice and snow.

"Why is that?" Riker exclaimed. No one on the bridge, not even Data, had an answer for him.

No, he told himself silently, the figures the ship's computer was now showing him on one of his station's small screens could not be true. A deep scan of an ice bound grappler revealed what had to be thousands of new holes opening into subspace. As he watched, their number doubled, then doubled again. Dimensional folding? Was that possible? Apparently so, he thought, shaking his head in disbelief as he bade farewell to the universe of Einstein, Hawking, and Cochrane.

A glance around the bridge at the other officers told him that all of them had drawn the same conclusions. A couple were gaping at the screen; others shook their heads at what the sensor readings on their consoles were telling them.

"Captain," Riker called out, "Dyson is rewriting the laws of physics before our very eyes. I suggest you come to the exit lock right away."

"Understood," said Captain Dalen. "We're coming as fast as we can."

"Where's the Dooglasse ship?" asked Picard.

"They're ahead of us," the Horta replied, "and already approaching the lock."

"And the starfish?"

"About a half light minute behind the Dooglasse."

"Good. Now--"

"The lock has its own set of grapplers," Riker called excitedly, feeling simultaneously awed and defeated. "They're behaving just as strangely as the ones on the snowfield, drawing tremendous amounts of energy from the sun and . . . Captain--the view aft--look at the sun!"

Picard found a strange and terrible beauty in the horror. The light inside Dyson was fading fast. The sun, as it shrank, flickered between red and gold, as if the Sphere were drinking in the sun's power, drinking it to extinction.

"I see, Commander Riker," Captain Dalen said from her station. "Now about the lock?"

Riker's voice replied, "The Dooglasse ship is close enough to trigger it at any moment. . ."

Troi, standing near Guinan, was watching the viewscreen intently. Picard waited with Captain Dalen and the rest of the Darwin's bridge personnel for Riker's confirmation that the lock was opening; but the word did not come.

"Well, Number One?" Picard asked, keeping his voice steady.

"Negative, Captain. We have to try opening it from the outside."

On the Enterprise's bridge screen, the Darwin's telescope showed the Dooglasse gamma flare coming into view like a false star, eclipsing the lock. Up ahead, on the ground, perhaps six Earth diameters from the lock, another star winked on.

Grappler flare, Riker thought--or "apparent" grappler flare. It was joined, a minute later, by a whole constellation of false stars, and the sun, in response, seemed to tremble.

"It's no use!" Riker called out with dismay. "We can't get you out."

Picard was trying to think of what to do next. "It could be worse, Number One," he heard himself say, surprised at how calm his voice sounded even to him.

"It's difficult to imagine how," Captain Dalen said.

"No?" He turned in his saddle to look back at the Horta captain. "Just imagine that we are still back there, amongst those islands." Picard mused on that for a moment; an idea was coming to him. "But the more I think about it, Dalen, that could turn out to be exactly where we want to be."

"Are you mad?" the Horta captain said, her voice rising as she drew herself up in her saddle. "Are you completely out of your mind?"

Picard ignored the accusation, turning back to the viewscreen. "We must go out behind that star! We can follow the sun into the sea. It's the only way you can save your ship."

There was a pause and then finally Dalen said, "Then maybe it's time for us to be bold, Jean-Luc. I can't think of anything better to do, and I am now beginning to see the reason in your madness, so I am going to follow your advice. In fact, the more I think about it, the sorrier I am that I didn't think of your idea myself."

"Riker?" Picard asked. "Did you get that?"

"Yes, Captain, and so did the other two ships . . ." Riker fell silent.

"What is it, Number One?" Picard asked, sweeping his gaze toward the bottom of the great bowl in which a chain of islands was obscured now, before even the most powerful of the Darwin's magnifiers, behind a veil of mist and storm, and the glare of a cherry-red sun, down there in the bottom.

The voice of Data came back to him: "We are calculating the time remaining until 'sunset,' and trying to take into account new surges of subspace activity."

"Where?" Picard asked.

"Everywhere," Riker's voice said. "Mostly the surges are concentrated around grappler points-- and in a huge rim forming beneath the Great Scott Sea. But they're spreading everywhere, Captain.'**

"Geometric or arithmetic?"

"Geometric, I'm afraid."

"I see," said Picard, realizing that whatever would happen, would happen soon. It seemed to him that Dyson was bracing itself for the impact, preparing for the sun to go through.

But if such abilities existed, why not use them to prevent the sun from going through? It made no sense to him, and yet at the same time it made all the sense in the world: The efficiencies of man were not the efficiencies of Dyson.

"Data?" Picard asked.

"It seems, Captain, that you will have to follow the sun too closely for comfort."

"But can it be done?" Picard demanded.

"Yes--with full shields up."

"And the Dooglasse ship? And the starfish?"

"They will have to be towed behind you."

"That doesn't leave a great deal of power for shields," Riker added.

"Close," Picard said. "It's going to be close." He knew how small the chances were that his desperate plan would succeed.

"Make course!" Captain Dalen shouted, her mechanical voice filled with the glee of a child.

A very determined child, Picard thought.

"I sense them," Troi said as she listened to the alien cries. "I sense the sea swifts--trapped." Her hands clenched into fists, but there was no one to strike at, no one from whom a price might be exacted for all this suffering.

The cries came from the Darwin's communicators, filling the bridge with the sound of rasping, of whistling, of voices rising to a high pitch and then falling again. A comlink was picking up the calls of the sea swifts who had remained behind in the Great Scott Sea. To Troi, they sounded like the whale songs of Earth, the calls of the sea dragons of Betazed, and the songs of birds; and yet there was an undertone in their sounds that she had never heard before. She did not know what they were saying, but the emotion in their cries was both understandable and unbearable.

"As the sun begins to plunge down," Guinan said, "Mothers are crying out to their children . . ."

Troi thought she glimpsed tears in Guinan's dark eyes.

"What are they saying?" Captain Picard asked.

Troi knew the answer to his question before Guinan replied, "I hear mother crying to child, child crying out for father, grandfather to grandchild. I hear people crying, 'I love you.'"

The cries rose sharply in pitch, then ceased abruptly. Without any warning or fuss, they simply went out, like the shutting off of a lamp.

As the details of the coming sunstrike became more clearly visible, it was hard for Picard to imagine how the Darwin, or anything else, would survive. Where the porcelain city had been, scalding steam was now blowing to all points of the compass, forming huge streamers. Where the streamers grazed each other at varying speeds, eddies broke off into strings of hurricanes, each wider than the Atlantic Ocean, yet microscopic at Dyson's hyperplanetary scale. The streamers themselves resembled come-tary veils--which, in fact, they were. At the center of the comet, Picard knew, the porcelain towers were being roasted like dishes left too long in an oven. On distant shores, if shores still existed, torrential rains would be falling out of the veils, as if making an effort to lessen the sun's heat.

In the Balboa's cockpit, Worf waited for word from the bridge, while far below, great distance and great size made the falling sun appear to be hovering over the sea, as if reluctant to make the fearsome contact. Everything in him was tense, ready for battle--or for a rapid retreat.

His aft screen showed the two refugee ships, secured by invisible magnetic "tow lines."

Back there, in the Darwin's shadow, the ship of the sea swifts was a little white star sinking toward what was formerly a large turquoise blotch, long known to its inhabitants, as, simply, "the sea." A mosaic of glassy tiles--each so foamy and so light that, left alone in a field, it would have blown away on a gentle breeze--gave the ark's skin a sinister, reptilian aspect. Burned indelibly into the scales, on both her starboard and port sides, the ship displayed her name in bold red script--swept astern to give the illusion of speed. As the wind from the sun increased a hundred fold, something shivered inside the ship, and her arms flexed back, like the wings of a bird of prey descending upon an unwary target.

It was designed to do that! Worf realized, and something in him warmed at a sight that reminded him a little of the movements of those most admirable and beautiful examples of Earth's avian species, the hawks and falcons and eagles. At first glance, the thing they had called a "starfish" looked nothing at all like a spaceworthy vehicle--yet there it was, transformed into an alien raptor worthy of space.

A beep from a console near his arm warned him that the solar wind, as it hissed past the Darwin's magnetic field envelope, was increasing another hundred fold. On the descending sun, three brilliant white fountains--sea urchin spines--had swung suddenly in the same direction. They were pointing directly at him, like searchlight beams converging.

Suddenly Worf was aware that someone was entering the shuttlecraft from behind him. His hand reflexively darted toward his phaser as he swung around in his seat.

Deanna Troi had come aboard the Balboa. "It's seen us," Troi said as she came toward him, followed by Guinan. Beverly Crusher and Geordi La Forge were behind them, climbing down from the Darwin into the Balboa's hold.

"What are you doing here?" the Klingon demanded.

"Captains Dalen and Picard ordered us to go below," said Troi. "Just in case," she added absently.

Worf noticed that they were all transfixed--Troi, Guinan, Crusher, and Geordi--all held captive by the sun's approach to the Sphere's inner surface. He turned back to his screen. On the Darwin-facing hemisphere of the solar urchin, a dozen more spines were moving slowly into position, sweeping their gaze toward Darwin, like the eyes of Argus come awake.

On the bridge, Picard understood that the sun stations, when they had swatted at the Darwin once before, must have retained a memory of the ship's configuration, much as human blood cells retain a memory of every new virus's configuration, in case they should encounter it again.

It recognizes us! he thought, just before the force of the blast turned the aft wall suddenly into the floor; and the floor and ceiling into walls.

Captain Dalen struck the aft "floor" with a sickening thud, and Picard pounded down with a wet snap that told him his wrist was fractured. As he struggled to his feet and stood on the wall, the Darwin's computer realigned the gravitic field with such lightning efficiency that Picard immediately fell upon his face, coming down hard enough to break his nose.

It could easily have been a lot worse, he realized. The Horta crewmember near him had just missed his head by a margin measurable in gnat's breaths.

"Out of here!" Dalen called. "Everybody out of here!"

There followed a confusion of shuffling Horta bodies, some obeying and leaving, others coming forward.

On the screen, more sun-fountains were taking aim. Many more. Yet Picard did not move. Would not move.

"Abandon ship, Jean-Luc," the Horta captain said. "That's an order."

"You, too," Picard demanded.

"No. You wouldn't abandon your ship, would you? I won't abandon mine. I am not finished, here."

"Nor I."

"Yes, you are!" the Horta shouted, and the bridge screen began to fill the room with a yellow-white glow. "I know you," she continued in a softer tone, "and you have another destiny. Now leave."

Dalen was right. This was her ship and her command; he had done everything he could to help her, and would only be another problem distracting her if he remained aboard. Now his duty was to his own ship and crew.

"You gave us a plan that just might work," Dalen went on. "In fact, I'm betting that it will. Time for you and your people to get out of here and give us a chance to put it to the test."

"Bonne chance, Captain Dalen," Picard said as he moved past her toward the lift.

A lifetime later, the shuttlecraft Balboa, in accordance with both Captain Dalen's and Captain Pi-card's orders, was away, with Worf as pilot. A second later, the Engford--filled with water and piloted by refugees--detached from the Darwin; but when Pi-card looked back, he saw that the second shuttle was staying too close to the Horta ship, like a faithful pet that refused to leave.

It was all part of some great ballet being put on by Dyson's impresarios--except that no one had told anyone who was to dance and who was to be the audience. Anyone could be forced to watch or dance at a moment's notice as the great pas de deux of sun and inner surface threatened.

"Darwin to Engford," Captain Dalen called, pressing herself against the saddle at her captain's station, "away all boats! Impulse power! Engford, you are

She never finished the order. The ships were ripped from their paths, and seared, and strewn about in a concussion of heat and light; and the Darwin was in the center of the concussion.

The Horta saw something and tried to speak; but then, of course, she could not, and her ship was falling. ..

Falling...

Falling. . .

The starfish had been flung ahead of the Balboa, to judge from the views being transmitted on the comlinks. Picard, watching the images, could see that its captain was alternately thrusting forward and braking, trying to gain control of the ark. Oddly, it became a graceful motion to watch. The ocean, some two million kilometers below the starfish, was vaporizing in apparent silence. Nearer the red star, far away to starboard, both atmosphere and water had been hurled away completely. The porcelain city and the archipelagos, what was left of them, stood now in a vacuum on bare ocean bottom. They stood deep within the corona of Dyson's sun.

Riker listened to the voices from the captain's command station on the bridge of the Enterprise.

"Darwin!" the Enterprise called across the void. "Captain Dalen, can you hear us?"

"Balboa to Darwin!" Picard called. "Captain Dalen. Please respond."

"This is Jani. We are moving through the position last occupied by your vessel called the Darwin. There is no sign, we regret to tell."

The comlink from the Dooglasse ship showed the sun lashing out at a distant target, producing another concussion of light.

"I think that was Captain Dalen's ship," Picard said.

"I'm afraid so," said Riker, and then, on the Sphere below him, a bright spot appeared. There was hardly time for Riker to take note of it, the event happened so fast. All in one part of a second, a small piece of Dyson's shell glowed, then the glow expanded, became deep red at first, then yellower, then whiter, and then faded again to deep red, still within that part of a second.

The sun burned through with a flash.

It never actually touched the Sphere. Dyson's shell merely liquefied, then vaporized, then parted and blew away.

Someone behind Riker let out a cry. Riker sat stunned, unable for a moment to think or feel.

"Impossible!" one of the officers at the bridge engineering station aft was saying. "Just impossible!"

But there it was, on Riker's own forward view-screen. The only view more incredible than the sun eating its way into space was the scene coming to him from the starfish.

As if somehow parachuting down through the vacuum, the still-out-of-control ark was hovering, at what appeared to be merely mountaintop altitude, over a storm that reached from flat horizon to flat horizon. Millions of kilometers ahead, where the sun had set, a pillar of fire rose from the maelstrom and pointed straight into the sky.

This was no ordinary fire, Riker knew. It was air and water falling through the hole, first yanked irresistibly after the sinking sun's gravity, then blasted back inside the Sphere. Sheets of cooling steam and ionized gas and glittering flakes of snow caught the last rays of the fallen star and threw them to the walls of Dyson, which were bright enough to navigate by. The starfish-eye-view showed rips in the cloud cover, through which whitecaps a hundred times higher than Everest shone--no, not whitecaps, Riker realized: rapids. Everything in the Great Scott Sea--water, air, and over there a whole island--was being drawn toward the crater.

The starfish, though high above what passed for Dyson's ionosphere, was also being dragged slowly sunward. During the final moments before burn-through, a thin canopy of ionized gas had been hurled into space, hurled at an impossible angle, high over the shores of the Great Scott Sea. Now the starfish, its engines apparently under only partial control, was being carried down by streamers of sunward-bound gas, as a balloon is carried by the jet stream.

Riker feared that it would end for them soon, with their ark dashed upon the rapids. As the seconds passed into minutes, he knew it would end that way, and then Data turned toward him for a moment.

"The rapids themselves appear to be dying, sir" Data said to him before turning back to the screen.

Riker saw that something was rising in the ark's path, rising higher than the water, higher than the air.

"Impossible!" Riker said, echoing the engineering officer.

"Apparently so," Data said from his station, "but nonetheless it is happening."

"Enterprise to Balboa, what do you see?" Riker asked. At Worf s bidding the shuttle showed him a different perspective from the starfish: higher and looking straight down on the hole's west rim.

Worf had caught sight of the Dooglasse ship caught in a swirl of crystallizing vapor, struggling to maneuver through a snowstorm in space, but it was now shielded within the Balboa's force field and magnetic cocoon. "Dyson's Spear," as he was already calling that comet in his mind, pointed back through the disintegrating waterfalls, back through the hole in the Sphere, with the cocoon of two ships buried in its tail. Hydrogen, oxygen, silicon, and carbon, stripped of their electrons, swept past Balboa's bow at a significant fraction of lightspeed. The ship's magnetic field envelope shunted the charged nuclei and electrons to either side, much as the prow of a boat shunts water to port and starboard.

Worf knew that he was unlikely to see such a sight ever again; yet even the cometary spear was a mere detail in Dyson's vast and violent war dance.

"Riker to Picard," Riker's voice said. "Please report."

La Forge glanced at Picard, sitting next to him in the Cousteau.

"We're seeing teeth down there," Troi answered for the captain. "A whole mountain range, rising like teeth out of the sea floor .. . thirty kilometers high, now. It's damming the rapids."

Mountains? Geordi wondered, peering at his instruments. How? Dyson's powers-that-be had failed to move their sun. How, then, had they managed to plow so much mass into mountain ranges so quickly? And then he guessed that force fields covered with mud and water would look much like mountains.

Hollow mountains.

It seemed as good an explanation as any, except that his instruments were showing--what had Data called it? Dimensional folding?

Whatever it was, it was now manifesting along the entire hull of Dyson. Geordi could no longer be certain of what his scans were showing, because the multiple thousands of subspace microverses manifesting up, down, starboard, port, forward, and aft were beyond measure. Soon, Dyson would be completely invisible to his scans. From his engineer's perspective, the Sphere was about to drop out of the universe.

He was beginning to suspect that Dyson's powers-that-be were quite insane. He glanced at Worf next to him, but the Klingon was a stone figure.

"Picard to Riker!" Picard's voice said.

"Riker here, Captain."

"Where is the neutron star? Still on the same course, I presume?"

"Still on trajectory, Captain," Riker said, sounding, to himself, less awed than he felt. Then, after a long silence, he added, "As last predicted, it has missed the Sphere."

Yet another miracle, he thought, in a string of miracle-moments that numbed the mind's ability to absorb. Riker wondered then if the Dyson Sphere had altered his capacity to ever be surprised by anything again.

The neutron star missed? Impossible, Picard thought. Like everything else about Dyson, it seemed impossible: For all the effort on the part of those who had sent it, they had missed! The images transmitted from the Enterprise showed the neutron star moving away, clearly unable to compensate for the Sphere's last-minute maneuvering.

Ahead of the Balboa, cometary streamers were still gushing up through the hole. Picard stared at a bright foaming mass of what looked like waves breaking at the foothills of a mountain range. The breakers had to be utterly huge to be seen across the gulf that separated him from the shore, and yet the distance was shrinking before impulse velocity. He swung one of the Balboa's scopes aft, toward the Dooglasse ship, where Jani and his crew would be looking around in bewilderment, and perhaps in terror, at a world that was darkening rapidly. Night was falling for the first time in their history, but no stars were coming out to light the darkness, except for the grappler flares, visible only in computer-enhanced green, and now becoming invisible altogether.

Geordi saw that the starfish's engines, too, were becoming invisible, though the ark appeared to be gaining control now, as it made headway against the ionosphere's current. His scans from the Balboa showed the starfish descending toward an old river delta before its engine signature gave him--for want of a better explanation--the illusion of folding into subspace and winking out.

The engineer was certain that a sufficiently powerful telescopic view would allow him to see the starfish, still out there somewhere, still in the visible wavelengths of light, still moving under its own power--but there was no time for collecting more pieces of the Dyson jigsaw. The wide course correction Worf was making to avoid an uprushing snowstorm--one of Dyson's reefs--took all of Geordi's attention from the starfish, and suddenly the edge of the mountain range was flying toward him, threatening to swallow the Balboa. The rim seemed closer than it ought to have been, given Worf s piloting skills. It was as if... as if the opening were contracting.

Geordi tore his gaze away from the mountains-- on one side the night surf, on the other side a deep well with a comet stuck in it--long enough to take a glance at his altimeter. It showed nothing--nothing sensible, at least. According to Balboa's instrumentation, Dyson no longer existed.

The instrumentation of his own senses and his own common sense told him otherwise, of course, as the Balboa and its cocoon plunged through the ionosphere and the view in all directions was diminished by a yellow glare.

The ring of hollow mountains looked real enough, even through the glare of ions against the Balboa's shields; real enough, and spine chillingly close.

Worf was thrusting hard to starboard, swinging the sun directly into the Balboa's path, and still the cliffs looked as if they were about to scrape the port side. They were covered in a glaze of ice chips and accelerated hydrogen, and the Balboa shot by too quickly to record even a single snapshot of the black shapes that struggled on a crack in the glaze. They were the size of elephants, the shape of dust mites, faster than cheetahs, and smarter than Data. Like an army of corpuscles gathered at a flesh wound, they spun a fibrous scab that was partly webbing and partly their own bodies. Of this army, only one member recorded the passage of the cocoon. It took notice that the two ships inside appeared to be growing, filed this fact away for future reference, and returned its attention to more important concerns.

Two-tenths of a second later, Worf was piloting in open daylight. In another six-tenths of a second he had swung the Balboa ninety degrees to port and, while preserving all of his forward momentum, was vectoring away from the sun as hard as he could without wrenching the towed Dooglasse ship apart.

Twelve seconds after that he looked around and saw the outer shell of Dyson, as clear and bright as high noon. He breathed a sigh of satisfaction, feeling as gratified as if he had defeated an enemy in hand-to-hand combat, just as Data said from the Enterprise, "The Sphere is slowing."

"Slowing?" Picard asked.

"It has stopped," Data added.

Worf gazed at the horizon in awe, thinking of the control of mass and inertia involved in stopping such a large object.

"It is now reversing its motion," Data's voice said without emphasis.

Worf muttered a curse and vectored the engines elsewhere, lest the horizon rush up to meet him.

Caught between the sun and the ground--again; but vectoring, this time, far beyond the reach of the urchin spines, the Balboa flew onward. Picard shook his head in wonder and exhaustion and sat back at his station, feeling suddenly unnecessary and insignificant. Down there, on the other side of the shell, most of an ocean had been lost... and a world as old as Earth . . . and its moon . . . and whatever lands they had bowled across . . . and no fewer than two races had probably perished.

He had tried to prevent this damage, but to the Dyson Sphere, it all added up to barely more than a bad scrape. The superplanet, having bled a little, was bandaging up now and moving on at its own super-planetary scale.

Hortas. Sea swifts. Marionettes.

Try as he might, what Picard was certain he would never forget, what he would never escape, was the realization that Dyson took no notice of them.
