Dyson's Web

"RIKER TO DALEN, please come in."

"Darwin, this is Balboa. Darwin, Darwin, we have made safe exit. Repeat, this is the Balboa, answer if you can hear me."

Captain Dalen heard the bailings from the Enterprise and the Balboa, but she did not respond. She had sent her last message just a few moments ago.

The message was: "Thanks for the good advice, Jean-Luc."

No Federation here--not now, not ever--forever. No one was going to assign her to a new site before her exploration here was complete. The Darwin had come down on water--again; And this time she was down for the long haul. This time, the sun had seen to it that her ship would never fly again.

All well and fine, the Horta captain decided. It would take forever to visit all of Dyson's unexplored shores; and by practical human standards, she and her crew really did have forever.

And--oh, the wonders that lay ahead!

"It's very close now, Captain." Lieutenant Jee was speaking, who was at present assisting three other squid with the lashing of the shuttlecraft Engford to the Darwin's starboard hull. One of the Great Scott Sea survivors had taken Jee's name, and another had taken Ensign Lenn's, and another Lieutenant Veere's, presumably as a sign of gratitude for their help.

Before the lines between the Engford and the Darwin were secured, sunrise erupted through the same well the sun had dug and fallen into more than a hundred million kilometers downstream. The star rose swiftly, returning in triumph to flood with light the vast realm it had so recently abandoned. In only two minutes, it was clear of the well, lofting like a brilliant balloon, its dawn banishing the cometary veils. Twenty minutes later, it might have been mid-morning. Two hours after that, it might have been noon.

Captain Dalen was nagged by an impression, for no reason that she was logically or rationally aware, that the changes occurring outside were even more dramatic. She felt--she knew--that the humans would be shut off from her till the end of time; and she found herself thinking that all the universe was shifting . . . swelling ... all of it except right here!

Nightfall had come again to the Dooglasse, whose ship was now joined to the Balboa, inside the Enterprise's protective cocoon.

"It's still shrinking," Riker called excitedly.

As indeed it was, Picard saw as the Enterprise stood off and watched. For the first time, the Dyson Sphere really did look like a planet. It was as small as Earth now, and growing smaller with each passing second. The instruments suggested that it did not exist at all, except visually and as faint distortions in the geometry of spacetime.

Riker shook his head. "Captain, it should have more gravitational compaction than a neutron star by now."

"I know," Picard said, "and by the time it's down to the Enterprise's size, whole Earth masses will be compressed into spaces smaller than golf balls. It should be a black hole, by then."

"But I'll wager it won't be," Riker said with a faint smile.

Picard nodded. "I begin to think we've been oversimplifying things here, don't you?"

Riker shrugged. "What else can we say? Everything we know tells us there's a whole sun down there, whole star systems full of suns if we count all the mass from which they built it--and yet at Dyson's surface I'm registering less than one-sixth Earth gravity. The only rational explanation is that Dyson doesn't quite exist in our universe any more. And that isn't quite rational."

"Yet it is extraordinary," Picard muttered under his breath, as a fuller realization of what had happened came into his mind.

But Data was ahead of him. "Captain," the android said, "did we wake the Sphere's artifical intelligence to all this action?"

For once, Picard knew that he was ahead of Data. "We might have been entirely superfluous. In fact, we might even have been a slight impediment."

"Do you think so, Captain?" asked Data.

"It's entirely likely," Picard said.

"Entirely likely means yes, does it not, since the word 'entirely' takes all doubt away from the word 'likely.'"

"Quite right," Picard said, gazing at the telescopic view of Dyson's shrinking disk.

"Then are you suggesting that we should have stayed away, since we were not needed?"

Picard rebelled at the thought and said, "Data, I wouldn't have missed this for anything."

"Thanks for the good advice, Jean-Luc." He thought again of Captain Dalen's last message, and wondered if this universe would ever see her and her crew again.

The Sphere was a distant gray bead now, contracting faster and faster through that ghostly hole it had dug in the cosmos--and preparing, no doubt, to pull the hole in after itself. No doubt, it would also pull a part of Picard down with it, as it folded into microverses and tapped energies .that could only be guessed at.

"Be careful what you wish for . . ." his mother had warned.

Well, he had gotten more than he wished for, as he hoped and yet he also dreaded that he would ever again find something as mysterious and horrifying, as wonderful and as belittling as the Dyson Sphere. This seemed to him so entirely unlikely that he returned the hope and the dread, for now, to that place of dearest wishes that waited in his archaeologist's heart. He would visit those wishes again, as surely as his blood visited the ventricles of his engineered heart.

"It has gone quantum," Data announced. "Dyson's gravitational field is... virtually nonexistent."

Quantum. Smaller than any of the blood cells that flowed in his veins. . . smaller than a virus particle--Dyson, the whole thing . . . smaller than the diameter of a proton. Picard hunched slightly forward in his station, with his arms folded across his chest, as if he were trying to keep warm. And there was a coldness in him, a chill born of the realization that the greatest object ever constructed had just sunk from view, leaving him adrift in unfulfilled expectations. Adrift, alone, abandoned?

No, he told himself. He was adrift, but not alone. Something was out there, and it was coming his way.

And it knew his name.

Locutus. . .

"Data?"

"Captain, there is a Borg vessel at the limits of our sensor range."

So, it was not over yet.

"What's it doing?" Picard asked.

"Nothing at all, Captain."

Picard sat back and considered, then gazed at Riker. Number One was wearing his cautious, annoyed look. "Perhaps all of our assumptions were not wrong after all," Riker said.

Picard found himself agreeing, in a way: "Relativity and dimensional folding aside, I'd say even a clock that isn't running would have to be right twice a day."

Riker shook his head. "Thanks, Captain."

Picard watched Data put an enhanced view on the screen, showing an ever so faint optical distortion in the place where Dyson's center had been.

"I'm thinking about the assumption we came to when the neutron star first appeared," Riker continued, "about how some distant remnant of the Dyson engineers--perhaps the Borg--might have been trying to destroy something in its past that could be of benefit to us. Something in the Sphere."

"Whatever it was," Picard said, "we didn't find it."

As he spoke, the Borg cube disappeared in a wash of subspace distortion. Either it had been destroyed somehow, or it had sped off in a hurry, fleeing faster than any Borg ship had hitherto been clocked. Simultaneously, the tiny distortion on Data's display finally pulled the hole in behind itself. The Sphere had left no footprints, quantum or otherwise; but Picard could not shake the feeling, the deep instinctive knowing, that the Borg had disturbed a sleeping tiger . . . and it was now following them.

It might very well be very far from over, he thought. But of one thing he was certain: The Sphere's example--its future significance for Federation thinking--would not be easily exhausted. It represented what was "merely" an early, perhaps even sinful attempt at cosmic engineering, an extravagant effort by an intelligent species to change the face of the cosmos. The human mind, so recently out of its cradle, still boggled at the idea of remaking a galaxy, or an entire universe, nearer to its heart's desire. Against human wishes, the universe might very well be a "sorry scheme," as the poet said; but human desires were still too vague to know what to want. Knowledge, love, a graceful life? But when the day of self-knowledge arrived . . . what then?

And for a moment Picard feared the wishes that waited to conflict with those of humankind.
