Transit of Darwin

THE SPHERE'S LOCK, closed again. Geordi, sitting aft of Captain Dalen on the bridge, monitored from an engineer's station as the Darwin went forward. His console and display screen were nearly identical to his bridge station aboard the Enterprise, except for being closer to the floor so as to be more easily accessible to a Horta. He was sitting on one of the Horta saddles, which had turned out to be more comfortable than he had expected; at his right, Lieutenant Kar, one of the engineering officers, sat in front of another console.

Slowly the lock opened, and the ship entered the great lighted space.

"Darwin to Enterprise," Captain Dalen said over the subspace link. "We are safely inside and proceeding sunward."

"Reading you clearly," Data's voice replied.

"Captain Picard," Geordi said, "we've just picked up an anomalous gamma ray flare, but it's not from the sun. One Gev, precisely--meaning proton-anti-proton annihilation. I'm seeing an apparent antimatter engine burn near an Earthlike planet orbiting some seventy million kilometers from the sun-- planetary period, some two hundred and twenty-five days. And there's something else, Captain. A moon, thirty-three hundred kilometers across, coming around the far side of the planet."

"Full impulse ahead," Captain Dalen said.

Geordi looked up from his equipment, realizing suddenly that he had been addressing Captain Picard and not the Darwin's captain; but he saw from the expression on Picard's face--a slight flush in infrared--that he should let the error go this time. He nodded back, then turned again to the instruments.

As the distance to the planet diminished, and the gamma ray source swelled on the Darwin's view-screen, Geordi noticed from the readings on his console that there was something familiar about the continents and oceans on this star's only natural satellite, and suddenly he understood what he was looking at

"Captain Picard," he said excitedly, and then," Captain Dalen, the surface features of the planet ahead are the same as those on the inside of the Sphere! The builders apparently projected large the features of their own world." He put the forward screen into a quick three hundred and sixty degree sweep to illustrate the fact.

On the world below, and in the sky above, the Great Scott Sea was unmistakable--circular and huge, as one might imagine the eye of God. Geordi supposed that it must originally have been an asteroid crater, bigger than Earth's so-called dinosaur killer, bigger than the Great Hudson Bay. Flooded for more than a billion years, it bad held sway as the homeworld's most dominant geologic feature, until its offspring projected it onto a surface larger than some planetary orbits.

"Further evidence?" Picard asked.

"Further evidence that the Dysons did indeed enclose their original sun when they built the Sphere," Geordi replied.

"And they kept their homeworld," Captain Dalen added.

"Perhaps out of aesthetic, or even sentimental reasons," Troi said; she was seated on a cushion at the Horta captain's right.

"Yes, very likely," Picard said from his seat near the Horta helmsman, "since to keep the world meant setting aside materials that would have contributed to the building of the Sphere. It was a deliberate choice not to use up their original world. Do you hear that, Data?"

"I agree, Captain," Data answered on the sub-space link.

"I assume that you would wish to take up an orbit around the planet?" Captain Dalen asked.

A surprising reading suddenly came up on Geordi's scans. "Captain . . . Dalen," he said, "that world's moon: It's mass is much too small for a solid body. It has to be hollow. Has to be."

"Lay course for the satellite," Captain Dalen ordered.

"Aye, Captain," the Horta helmsman answered.

Far astern of the Darwin, Data tested the lock again, flooding the bridge of the Enterprise with the sapphire-orange glow of a low mass flare star. He adjusted the lighting, now that he knew precisely where to look. The off-center sun and the double world that orbited it were blue-shifting slowly but ominously toward him. Wheels within wheels. Data thought, recalling the words of the ancient Earth prophet Daniel. And here he was, looking upon a hollow sphere, orbiting a sphere, within a hollow sphere.

By his command, the giant levers began to close again; and before the doors shut out the light completely, his screens pinpointed and enhanced the signature of the Darwin's impulse engines. When he knew where to look, and how to look, the engine burn was just barely visible, scratching a thin veil of antimatter flame and subspace distortion across the face of the sun. He watched proton-antiproton exhaust eclipse fusion; he watched the starship Darwin in transit of Dyson's star, and in his head he recorded it--all of it--and at that moment he had an odd sensation, a sudden conviction that he might be seeing the Darwin for the last time, that like the Flying Dutchman and the Mary Celeste, the Challenger and the Intrepid, no ship would ever again bear the name Darwin.

A strange group of associations, Data thought. This was what human beings meant when they talked of feelings of foreboding, or of being "spooked."

Data wondered why. Perhaps it was the very vastness of the Sphere, into which a tiny speck like the Darwin--or the Enterprise--could so easily disappear and end up traveling for eons, like a ghost ship, without ever finding its way out again. Certainly, the loss of any ship was one of many possibilities, nothing more, but it seemed, at that moment, that he was watching the last of her.

As the Darwin settled into orbit around the alien moon, Picard saw on the forward viewscreen that its surface was a smooth eggshell finish. There were "dust" particles clinging to the shell--bundles of heavy helium clumped together with carbon isotopes and other residua of the solar wind. No signs of cratering, however. No meteoritic debris of any sort. Of course not. Every chip of ice, every interplanetary pebble, had been swept up in a cyclopean construction project.

"No sign of an entrance," Geordi said from his bridge station aft.

"What did they do, seal it up?" Picard asked.

"It seems that way."

"Or the entrance is expertly hidden," Picard suggested.

"We may not have time to find it," Captain Dalen said.

Picard nodded agreement, and said, "Then we should take one of your shuttles down to the surface and see if we can break in."

"Ah," Captain Dalen said. "After a few weeks of ceramic foam and false granite, my crew will be more than ready for a new flavor."

"It may be a surface that even a Horta can't eat through," Picard cautioned.

"We will see if that is true. Horta can synthesize what may be needed, and walk through."

It still startled him, from time to time, to think that Hortas thought of "walking through" solid objects. It was their physical heritage, of course, but something in the way Captain Dalen had spoken made him think that she was also trying to make another obscure Horta joke." I know you're sorry not to be going with us," Picard was saying to Troi, "but I should leave one member of my crew here, and you are the obvious choice."

"Of course," Troi said. She knew why; more time spent with other members of Captain Dalen's crew would give her more familiarity with their emotions, with what was normal for them. Neither protocol nor standard procedure required her to accompany Picard and La Forge to the shuttle entrance, but she had been picking up some disquieting sensations from Captain Dalen. That was yet another reason for comparing with other members of her crew what she sensed inside the Horta commander.

The shuttle hatch was already open, and Troi noticed that the interior of the shuttlecraft Balboa had seats suitable for humanoids as well as saddles for Hortas. Captain Dalen's pilots were already aboard the shuttlecraft. For her away team, the captain had brought along Lieutenant Jee, introduced earlier to the Enterprise officers as a "young archaeologist." Two other Horta officers, Lieutenant Sherd and Ensign Kodo, completed the team. Picard and La Forge greeted the Hortas, then followed them into the shuttlecraft.

Troi stepped back as the Balboa's hatch door slid shut. She had picked up that same disturbing sensation again, and from all of the Hortas present this time. Anticipation, curiosity--those expected feelings were there, but she could also sense them in Captain Picard, in Geordi, inside herself. Something else tinged the feelings she was picking up from Dalen and the other Hortas, a kind of reckless ecstacy, almost a mania, a lust to embrace the unknown.

The feeling faded. Troi told herself not to jump to conclusions about a species she had encountered for the first time so recently. But what she had felt suggested that the Hortas might be too quick to rush into dangerous situations in order to satisfy their powerful curiosity, and that, she knew, could endanger this mission--and all of their lives.

Moments later, the shuttlecraft Balboa was skimming low over the alien moon.

"Still no sign of an entrance," Geordi observed. Indeed, his surface scans had failed to reveal a seam small enough even for a virus to squeeze through. "It really does look as if they deliberately sealed it off."

"Were they trying to hide something?" Picard mused.

Data called out over the link: "It is always perilous to ascribe motives to an alien species, Captain."

"Quite right, Data. So we've little choice but to go in, assuming we're all curious enough."

"Oh, I think we're curious enough," Captain Dalen said.

"I certainly am," Geordi added, wanting to explore as much of this engineering marvel's interior as possible." Set us down, then, Mr. La Forge," Picard ordered, then glanced with obvious amusement at the Horta archaeologist saddled beside him, like a royal rock on display in a museum.

Their first landfall in the Dyson Sphere seemed straightforward enough. The Balboa's docking tube would form an air-filled path to the moon's surface, and Captain Dalen's four-Horta away team would simply "walk through" the crust underneath, thus causing the least possible amount of damage to the structure, and Geordi hoped, setting off no alarms. On the other side of the shell, there was atmosphere, cold but breathable. Geordi had dropped two walnut-sized probes on the surface. The Hortas would survive inside, he knew. The sensor readings told him so.

He swept the Balboa into a graceful arc, as if it were a helicopter, then slowed to a hover, flashed his molecular strobes, and landed so gently on the moon's equator as to leave its thin veneer of helium-three "dust" undisturbed.

"Start drilling," Picard said. Geordi began to hope that Horta saliva would be enough; this sphere was not sheathed in carbon neutronium, which gave him a clue as to why it was here, and why it was sealed up.

"We're attached," Geordi said. "Horta entrance now open, and something like bedrock is below us, at least thirty meters of it, then topsoil. That's what my readings say." Lieutenant Jee said, "I will walk through first." Her amplified voice was slightly higher than that of Captain Dalen.

Jee and the Horta captain, followed by Sherd and Kodo, slid ahead of Picard and Geordi into the shuttle's service bay, where a double-sized manhole led down to the moon's surface. Jee and Dalen sank away the moment they touched the ground. The other two team members fell in quickly behind, examining the shaft as they descended, shoring up the walls wherever it seemed necessary. Alice's fall down the rabbit hole had been much easier, Geordi thought, but the Horta captain seemed to think nothing of it.

After a few minutes, Geordi saw a circle of red light wink on at the bottom of the well. It winked out just as suddenly, and he realized that Lieutenant Jee was coming back up.

As she neared the exit, the Horta cried out, "Confirmed--human suitable atmosphere inside! But dark. Red dark."

"So how was it?" Picard asked, and the Horta's answering shudder reminded Geordi of a shrug.

"It was delicious!"
