Contagion

THE HORTA HAD made their first landfall thirty minutes before. Now they stood, hard as it was for Captain Dalen fully to accept the reality, on the inside of a sphere--topsy-turvy--inside another sphere--topsy-turvy. The world within the world reflected only the longer, redder wavelengths of light. The weak red light was overpowered by black shadows; and, although she could not see them, vibrations in the ground permitted her and her team to feel strange shapes trying to move secretly forward and back in the dark. So far, they seemed to be keeping their distance; but until Picard arrived with reinforcements, Dalen had decided that she and her Hortas should cluster together, hold their ground and, as the humans would put it, be steady as a rock. There were no life forms here other than plants. So the scans had shown. Dalen did not want to remind herself that, before they had been run through that new Federation computer, the first scans of the inside of the Dyson Sphere had revealed no life signs at all.

"Curiouser and curiouser," as the captain of the Enterprise was so fond of saying. Does he really understand how much curiouser this gets? Dalen thought, and should I tell him?

To begin with, there was the problem of similarity versus identically. In spite of the Sarpeidan and Dyson quantum spacetime anomalies, as near as Dalen's crew could tell, every electron and proton in Dyson's hull was identical to every electron and proton everywhere else in Dyson, and everywhere else in the universe. In physics, the sameness of the individual bends in spacetime that built quarks and gluons and beget protons was absolute sameness, a sameness very unlike Data and his "identical" twin brother, unlike any two of the insulin molecules that ran through Picard's veins. Though similar, it was impossible to make any two androids or insulins absolutely identical.

And why is this? Dalen thought. "Why," she said aloud, "are all protons, for all their infinite opportunities for uniqueness, exactly the same? Why all electrons? And neutrons?"

The other Horta seemed unsurprised by her sudden questions, but then they were all undoubtedly brooding upon the same matters as she was.

A long time before, as Picard and his species measured time, the human physicists John Wheeler and Richard Feynman had theorized that every proton was identical to every other proton because there was really only one proton in the entire universe. In this case, it simply raced back and forth in time, again, and again, and again--appearing to show up everywhere at once. Starting off from the Big Bang, it would be shooting through Dalen's present, where she might catch a glimpse of it in Data's fingernails, or in Picard's insulin, or in Dyson's rivers, before it bounced back from the remote future and reappeared in her present as a proton moving backward in time, where some distant corner of the universe, or the antimatter pods of the Darwin and the Enterprise, would perceive it as a forward moving antiproton, before it reversed course, again, from the Big Bang. This being true, the same would hold for all the anti-electrons coursing through Data's positronic brain.

Wheeler and Feynman had buried their theory, or so those human physicists had thought. And then the discovery of subspace had made spacetime itself a cosmic free-fire zone. And now the discovery of subspace anomalies, Dalen mused, had made all things possible.

Was it possible, now, she asked herself, that a proton bouncing back from the future could dictate the present?

Yes.

Was it possible, then, that the present could dictate the past?

Oh, yes.

"I can picture it, now," Dalen said, suddenly wanting to share her insight with her sisters and comrades, "one antiproton and one positron in all the universe, running head-on into the proton and the electron at the bridge of time, at the moment we call the Big Bang, thereby guaranteeing that the universe will be created."

Sherd, Jee, and Kodo were silent for several moments. Then Sherd said, "Is it possible, then, that whoever created subspace planned it that way-- perhaps even tampered with the manner in which the Big Bang would occur, reshaped the cauldron of creation?"

"Yes," Dalen answered. "I believe there has been a great deal of tampering; more than any of us may ever realize.

CAPTAIN'S LOG, STARSHIP ENTERPRISE IMPACT MINUS 12.5 DAYS EGRESS MINUS 9.5 DAYS

Dalen Base was established only twenty minutes ago. My chief engineer has confirmed for Captain Dalen that the moon has its own subspace anomaly--which acts as a defensive barrier against our transporters. The Dysons made sure to button this place up tightly. Luckily for us, they did not anticipate Hortas. Captain Dalen's away team has saved us hours, perhaps a full day of work. Still, we may have to move even faster than I had hoped.

Data tells me that the larger Sphere is accelerating, and if one watches very carefully, one can actually see the Great Scott Sea moving perceptibly nearer. On the Sphere's walls, we cannot discern any inertial effects whatsoever arising from the acceleration.

On the wall opposite Great Scott, however, on the side moving away from us, the sacrifice to inertia is already horribly apparent The land-masses there are turning white under the retreating daylight Probably for the first time in Dyson's history, water is crystallizing out of the atmosphere. If the retreat continues, the air itself may eventually flow liquid, then turn to sand.

How strange that the first snowfall should come to Dyson, now that it is so close to the neutron flame.

Not much time left

The hole in the moon had been cut at a forty-five degree angle, so it was possible to slide part of the way, in the direction that a sixth gravity would present as "down." But after a point, the gravitic direction reversed to "up," and Picard knew that he would emerge onto the inner surface of the sphere at four-fifths Earth gravity. Both he and Geordi were wearing traction soles and gloves, in case it became necessary to brake or climb.

"Ready?" Picard asked.

"Lead the way, Captain," La Forge replied.

Picard went in head first, and saw at once that the slide was slow enough to make braking unnecessary. He slid along slowly, feeling his way down toward the dim red light, and the opening grew larger. After twenty seconds he stopped, feeling the increased gravity in his heavier limbs.

"Mr. La Forge?" he asked.

"I'm right behind you, Captain."

Picard started to pull himself forward with his hands, then pushed with his feet. He was now climbing. He pulled himself along for what he estimated were about three minutes until he was at the opening. Grasping the edge with both hands, and pushing with his feet, he climbed out of the hole, sat down on the edge, and rolled away to one side.

He stood up and surveyed a dull red landscape. It was rocky and barren, save for a small stand of trees and bushes nearby, and similarly colored patches on the up curved horizon. The trees were bare--dead, apparently. Geordi climbed out and stood next to him, and they looked up at a miniature red sun, radiating its pitiable energy into the hollow.

The Horta away team was waiting for them. "Air seems dusty," Picard said, and exhaled a cough that, in the surrounding atmosphere, became a breath of warm condensation. "Low oxygen, too." This was deliberately sealed up," La Forge said. "The Dysons must have seen this place as a failure."

"That sun," Picard said. 'I'll bet it's artificial, and they couldn't get it to work, so they continued by enclosing their natural sun."

"No," said Captain Dalen. "I think this was all a test. A practice sphere, if you will."

"Could be," Geordi acknowledged. "It strikes me that they were looking far ahead. When this moon was constructed, all those missing stars and planets were probably still visible in the homeworld's night skies."

As Picard's eyes adjusted, he started to see by the red light. The curve of the inner land swept away from them in all directions, revealing a craggy, pitted, desert interrupted by distant oases of oddly shaped trees. More than a thousand kilometers away, lay the nearer shore of a circular sea whose center was located almost on the far side of the sun. It was the same continental and oceanic contour he had seen on the two worlds outside. It was the Great Scott Sea writ small.

Peering upward and seaward, Picard became aware of a sharp clicking noise, then noticed that some five hundred meters away, the rocks seemed to rise and move forward.

"Do you see that?" La Forge whispered in the redness that seemed to belong to some hell at the end of time. Then he began to scan with his tricorder. "Yes," Picard replied.

"Definitely biological, with no implant modifications." The engineer turned in a circle, penetrating the gloom with his visor. "They shouldn't be there, but they are."

"Biological life forms," Dalen said. "I was afraid of that. The Federation had better think about upgrading all of its scanning equipment."

"They're moving toward us in a circle," Geordi said.

Picard and La Forge stood back to back. Slowly, Picard began to see the creatures: tall, long-legged bipeds that reminded him of stick figure marionettes. They moved slowly in the red wilderness, reminding Picard of ancient wooden plows struggling to furrow the ground.

"I don't think we're going to communicate with them," Captain Dalen said.

The clicking sounds grew louder and sharper.

"It's not a language," Geordi said, examining his tricorder. "At least nothing we can translate."

"Signals--very simple, primitive signals," observed Picard.

"Yes," said the Horta archaeologist Sherd. "We've got a partial interpretation: something like, 'The hunger, the hunger,' over and over. That's as close as we can come."

"It would be a hard, restricted life in this sphere," Picard said. "This may be what. . . devolved . ..from the life forms that stayed inside. A very small population."

"And apparently a very hungry population," Captain Dalen said emphatically. "And not necessarily small. We happened upon them in the very first place we popped up, and they could be spread over an area as large as North America. And I'll give you a fair bet it's not rocks they hunger after."

Geordi increased the range on his tricorder and shook his head. "Too right, Captain Dalen. I'm beginning to worry that charcoal broiled humanity may be the flavor of choice."

"Then you should leave?"

"I think we'd better. Good safety tip."

"We'll come after you," Captain Dalen said. "If these creatures don't regard us as tasty, better to have us between them and you."

A dusty wind came up as Picard followed Geordi toward the opening in the ground. The marionettes stopped, and seemed to sway slightly. Then, as suddenly as it had come, the wind was gone.

The clicking resumed.

Picard and Geordi reached the opening and looked down. A faint light showed from the bay of the shuttle.

"You first," Picard said.

La Forge nodded, sat down on the edge, and slid away.

Picard waited, then took a last look at the desolate landscape beneath the red dwarf. Here all hope, it seemed, had ended, and these poor devils had somehow survived to pay the price of the experiment in Dyson Sphere construction. Why had this been permitted? Why had no one thought to sweep the surface clean before abandoning it... ?

It occurred to him then that if these life forms had survived here, however wretchedly, then there might be others lost inside the vastness of the Dyson Sphere. He could not assume that any other beings would be any more friendly than these--and others might have some of the resources of the Sphere's builders at their command.

The circle of stick figures was closing now, like a noose.

A sudden gust of wind caught his cheek, scraping it with a burst of dust. Picard touched his face, and saw blood on his fingers.

"Hurry!" Captain Dalen called out. "They look as though they might be considering the virtues of a silicon-based diet."

Captain Picard sat down on the edge of the opening and readied to slide down, then took a last look at the dwarf sun. Something black was moving across its surface, in a fast, close orbit as he watched; it reached the rim and disappeared

He was out of time. The alien figures were only a few tens of meters away. He let go and slid, feet first, into the opening. At first it was quick, then "down" became up and Picard realized that he would have to turn around to climb. He managed it after two tries, and in a few minutes was ascending through low gravity, into the brightly lit shuttle compartment.

"There's something else in there," he announced, thinking again of the catastrophe that was coming, and how little time there was to explore. A decade might not be enough merely to visit all the important places on the inner surface of the sphere he had just exited, and no one would give him decades, unless somehow the Dyson Sphere could be saved. "It's in close orbit around the red dwarf. Might be a vessel." And now he had another problem--the presence of biological life forms that might be a danger to him and the crew of the Darwin.

"But we'd have to get the shuttle inside," Geordi said, "which means a bigger hole. Or find another way in."

"We have to decide," Picard said, "whether to continue here or to spend our time elsewhere."

"What did it look like?" Geordi asked. "Do you suppose it was an old starship that found its way in and got stranded? Or just something the Dysons left behind?"

"Difficult to say whether it was a vessel, a small moon, or ... or, who knows what?"

"Mostly who knows what," said Captain Dalen, as she hauled herself out of the pit. "I saw it, too. It's another sphere, Captain. About thirty-three kilometers across."

Picard frowned. "A prototype of the prototype?" he asked.

"A sphere, within a sphere, within a sphere," sang the Horta as Lieutenant Jee emerged from the tunnel. "And who knows? Is yet a smaller prototype hidden within the prototype's prototype?"

"Or another within that?" Picard wondered aloud. "And another, and another, each with its own dwarf sun and a replica of the Great Scott Sea? If we can find the first prototype, and if it is small enough to be contained in the shuttle bay of the Enterprise, the information we could take with us would be priceless."

"Those are very big ifs, Captain," La Forge said.

"Beautiful ifs, Geordi."

Sherd and Kodo were now exiting the tunnel. "Riker to Picard," a voice called.

"Picard here."

"Captain, we've just sighted a ship coming around the far side of the homeworld. It's in orbit, and not putting out many signs of power. But it is equipped with cryocontrolled antimatter pods. I presume it's the source of those gamma flares you detected. No signs of a subspace cooling system. It uses space itself as a dump for engine heat."

"A real museum piece, then."

"Yet brand new, in working order," Riker said, with what sounded like admiration. "The ship's almost all engine. Payload capacity: no more than two dozen people, living in very cramped quarters."

"Can you see them?"

"The Darwin's scans do confirm life forms, Captain."

Picard considered this for a moment, realizing that he was now faced with the fact of intelligent, space faring life that would die in the next two weeks. He wondered if they could be aware of the coming destruction. To hide from them would protect the Darwin; to keep at a distance from them would eliminate the risk of both conflict and cultural contamination. In the vastness of the Dyson Sphere, the life forms aboard that alien ship might simply assume that the Darwin and its crew were only yet more denizens of Dyson that they had not yet encountered.

But he knew that he and his human and Horta colleagues could not try to evade the unknown beings. There was too much to learn, and possibly even a chance to aid them if they were friendly. Still, he and Captain Dalen would have to be cautious.

"Picard to Riker," he said, "we're coming back to the Darwin immediately."

"Understood."

He looked at the tunnel--which had to be plugged before the Balboa pulled away, lest they create a geyser on the moon's surface and kill, a little sooner, whatever still lived near the entrance. He wished he could learn more about the troglodytes in the red wilderness--for he could not shake the nagging feeling that his and Captain Dalen's first impression of them had been as far off the mark as Captain Kirk's first impression of the Horta and their world. And what about the mini-spheres, if such existed? He wished he could think of his departure from the moon as temporary, but he knew with reasonable certainty, as the entrance was sealed and the airlock detached, that he would never set foot here again. Yet he allowed himself to risk thinking--to risk wishing--that Dyson's peculiar movements were an awakening, of sorts, and that the Sphere might somehow protect itself from the coming onslaught. If that was what was happening, then Dyson was at best putting up an imperfect defense, but Picard allowed himself the little victory of hoping in the persistence of a will to live.

Where there was life, there was hope, even if certainty was an elusive gift.

"What do you make of it?" Picard asked from the bridge of the Darwin.

"My guess is they've been hiding from us," Riker said from the Enterprise, "but have now decided to come out and show themselves."

"Or it's chance, and they can't help being seen."

"That seems most likely," Data said over the link. "We have had no indication of an overall command structure in the Dyson Sphere, no general awareness in any center of what is happening to it."

The ship on the screen was indeed all engine: two magnetic rings separated by several kilometers of tether, reminding Picard of a flying spider's web.

Suddenly faces appeared on the screen, as if someone had assembled them for a group photograph. As Picard gazed into a half dozen pairs of alien eyes, he tried to make out the nature of the staring expressions. The eyes were humanoid, set in a humanoid face that seemed vaguely feline, but with only a hint of fuzz on almond-colored skin. There was no hair, only black fuzz, neatly shaved into a skullcap, it seemed. The ears were round.

Picard asked, "Troi, can you pick up anything from them?"

"Very little, Captain, but I don't think they're either a predecessor or offshoot of the Borg."

Picard said, "I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation starship Enterprise. Can you understand me?"

The faces on the screen seemed to smile, as if expecting that their picture would finally be taken. The face closest to the screen seemed confused by his words, then said, "Do you . . . know . . . our speech?"

Picard waited a moment, then said, "No, we are using a translator device. The translation may not be perfect." He identified himself again." It is working," Troi said, "which means the language must have some far-back link with others in the translator."

The translator rarely failed to work, Picard reminded himself, but one day it was likely to encounter a race whose language was inaccessible.

"Captain," Data said, "I see from your scans that these people carry no implants or other technological variations in their physiology. They are purely biological."

"Unusual," Riker added, "for a species with that much command of technology."

"I would like to ask a question," Picard said to the assembly on the screen. "Would you tell us some of your history?"

"History . . . ?"

"Your time before this," Picard explained, "what has happened to your people. Who are you?"

A look of what seemed to be understanding crossed the alien's face. "We call ourselves the Dooglasse," he said.

"Tell us of your ... times," Picard said.

"We ... of the Dooglasse . . . stand alone," the alien speaker began. "That is our way . . . whenever too many Dooglasse, some must leave . . ."

Picard realized that this meant migration to other parts of the Sphere's surface.

"Did you build your ship?" Picard asked.

"Build?"

"Where did you get the ship?" Picard asked, guessing the truth. The history of this race was lost to them. Far in the past, they had probably turned away from the great technology of the sphere, to live much like the marionettes of the red wilderness: as (presumed) troglodytes, squatters on the inner surface. But the Dooglasse inhabited a much larger surface area. Whenever populations expanded, fell into disagreement, or threatened one another with war, there would be virtually unlimited territories into which the dissidents would migrate. They had more than a couple hundred million Earth-sized territories from which to choose.

"We ... repaired the ship," the alien speaker continued, "to go... home."

This was a reasonably articulate group, Picard concluded, possibly among the youngest of the dissident lineages inside Dyson. They seemed to have recently rediscovered antimatter propulsion within the great open space of the Sphere.

"Home?" Picard asked.

The alien pointed down. "This world... we circle ... we believe to have been our home ... not the great curving surface. We have been mapping that... whence on the great surface have you come?"

Picard realized that they believed him to belong to another group from the inner surface. The Darwin, the Enterprise, and the neutron star had arrived in time for a Dyson Renaissance of sorts, a new beginning among some of those who had come out of the Sphere's historical amnesia.

It would be best not to volunteer too much information about himself and his crewmates, for the moment. He looked back to the friendly Dooglasse on the screen and said, "We wish to meet with you ... in a short time ... and tell you about ourselves."

The Dooglasse speaker nodded. "Yes, perhaps on the world below. We may explore together?"

"We will hail you again in a short time," Picard said, knowing that he needed some discussion with his officers. He found himself liking the Dooglasse speaker on the screen, and it was difficult for him to believe that this life form might be one of the unchanged ancestors of the Borg. Again, the coming destruction of the sphere elicited pity in him for the races that would perish--races that no one would ever know had perished.

Q, he recalled, had once warned humanity that the universe was not for the timid, for it came with no guarantee that it would always be fair. A few years earlier in Q and Horta years, the Book of Job had warned humanity that the universe was not for the timid, for it came with no guarantee that it would ever make sense.

He raised his hand in farewell and the screen blanked; and he reminded himself again: Where there is life, there is hope--not as something that followed inevitably from the mere fact of life, but strongly from life's refusal to "go gently into that good night," as the poet said. It just wouldn't go, wherever it could. In whatever way possible it filled the niches of nature, lit up with intelligent self-awareness, and reached out to create its own niches. Life prevailed.

"As we Horta have learned," Captain Dalen said in the Darwin's small conference pit, "the prevalence of genetically compatible humanoid life in the galaxy--at least in our experience of it so far--is strong evidence that indeed one ancestral race arose, then dispersed, leaving countless colonies and centers of intelligent life behind in various solar systems . . ."

The face of Data appeared on Dalen's screen. "Perhaps it was that very dispersal," Data said over the link, "that precipitated the decline. Vulcan, Klingon, human--their cultures all seem to have cultivated an amnesia about their common origin."

"Except perhaps for a hint, here and there, in ancient religious texts," said Captain Dalen. She was about to say something else, but instead she cut the thought short, shifted her weight on the floor, and gazed at Captain Picard, who was seated on a cushion across from her. The Horta had no need of chairs or saddles for themselves in this conference room, but Picard and his two humanoid officers looked comfortable enough on their cushions. Conference screens jutted out from the floor in front of all of them. Troi, the female humanoid, leaned toward her small screen.

The captain of the Enterprise looked at the Horta strangely, as if he were about to shiver. He gave the image of .the android on his own conference screen the same look.

"Maybe we should not think of it as a decline," Picard said. "Perhaps they thought it best to spread themselves thinly, to insure a long-term run of diversity. One might see that the peoples of the Sphere are also spread thin, in a smaller but not as beneficial version of our humanoid galactic Diaspora."

"Or," Riker said from the bridge of the Enterprise, "maybe the galactic dispersal was an attempt to flee something, an old enemy. It may be that this Sphere is the first and last of its kind, coming into existence right at the time of a dispersal of races, perhaps even precipitating it."

Above the conference pit, a viewscreen showed the neutron star, wrapped in slowed time. It was so massive that a teaspoon of it outweighed the Darwin and the Enterprise put together, yet it was wider than most starships, and, as it spun at thousands of revolutions per second, it appeared to drag little frames of time and space after itself with the same ease that tornadoes swept up pebbles and grass.

Captain Dalen had learned that all humanoid species, at some point in their history, had come to believe in a Great Father, or a Great Mother, who had created the universe and watched over it. She had come to regard this as a quirk unique to warm blooded, placenta! species; but as she watched the screen, she observed that on opposite sides of the neutron star, identical pairs of simultaneously created gamma photons, racing away from one another at light speed, somehow "knew" what each was doing and simultaneously did likewise.

Captain Dalen believed in time-dragging and sub-space. To believe that Troi was a psychic or that Jerusalem was a place of miracles made her feel timidly agnostic by comparison. And to believe that someone had created a world so vast that there was no hope of discovering it wholly--what did that make her? And to believe that a man had created Data in the image of man?

The Horta nodded excitedly and called across subspace to the Enterprise: "You and I and the Sphere, Data--we have more in common than the fact that, at one time or another, we have all seemed to be the last of our kind."

"We have all been molded from silicon," Data called back, having obviously made the connection in a microsecond. "And we were all fashioned, I presume, by carbon-based species. And, Captain Dalen, are you suggesting what I believe you are suggesting, namely that we are artifacts, all three of us?" Picard shook his head. "Is there nothing in heaven and Earth that is not archaeology anymore?"

"Probably not," said Captain Dalen. "My theory of Horta evolution is that we originated as self-replicating mining machines.-Like Data, we became self-aware. Like the Sphere, we were either abandoned by our creators, or we outlived them."

Or killed them, Dalen thought to herself, deciding not to say that aloud.

"And who might our neutron star thrower be?" Picard said. "Some fossil remnant of the Borg collective?"

"Perhaps something more alien than the Borg," Troi offered, "intelligence vastly different from the run of humanoid life. It might have seen the proliferation of humanoid genotypes and decided to prevent it."

"As you would say," Data replied from the screen, "the horse is long out of the barn, with humanoid life very widely dispersed, but this Sphere is still an eminently vulnerable target. It may also be that the old enemy no longer exists, or has vastly changed its ways, and that this is an old vengeance weapon, still working one last time."

"And who would have destroyed the old enemy?" Riker asked.

Picard had an answer at once. "Why, the Sphere-builders, I would think. The early Borg."

"So," Riker said softly, "we may have something to thank them for after all." Dalen let out her equivalent of a sigh. "I wouldn't be so sure of that," the Horta captain said.

Captain Dalen had been called to the bridge, apparently on a routine matter. Troi and La Forge followed her from the conference pit. Picard remained on his cushion, staring at that part of the wall screen display showing the relativistic cannon-ball still on course; and he watched Dyson's latest spurt of acceleration, clearly a defensive maneuver.

I wouldn't be so sure of that, the Horta had warned.

I guess we'll know soon enough, Picard told himself. Two enemies, one ancient and seemingly extinct, the other so long gone that it was archaeologically invisible, were coming suddenly to life.

An archaeologist's worst nightmare, Picard knew, was to come back from the wilderness with no results. Here, he did not worry about bringing back too few results. No. His concern here was over too great a feast of them.
