Songe D'autumn

CAPTAIN'S LOG, STARSHIP DARWIN

IMPACT MINUS 12 DAYS EGRESS MINUS 9 DAYS

During my encounters with various human beings, I have learned that a number of them harbor a very deep fear of transporter technology, a fear not so much of death as of being left alive in a hopelessly jumbled state. Data calls it bad programming; but we of Janus VI all share the same fear. Nevertheless, Federation regulations dictated that our ship be equipped with the infernal devices.

I'm glad for that now.

An hour ago, Geordi La Forge modified a new V.R. Visor to fit my head, and transported a large probe--about the size of a walnut--some three hundred kilometers above the sphere wall. It was, for me, like materializing in a spacesuit above the inner surface of Dyson--above that impossibly flat surface. Even from three hundred kilometers away, even through the eyes of a pebble that was speeding over deserts and rainforests at ten kilometers per second, I could see a road passing below, and a city with ship wakes going out from its harbor, and what had to be the vapor trails of high altitude, hypersonic jets. And how many more cities lie undiscovered in this country? I want to land there myself, on the great incurving yet impossibly level wall. But Captain Picard has other plans.

PICARD SAT on a cushion in the Darwin's small ready room, an odd, granite chamber in the Horta hive--which had graciously been provided to him by Captain Dalen. A slab of rock, something like a table top without legs, sat on the floor to hold the small screens and controls.

It was ironic, Picard thought, that after progressing beyond the abuses of market economies, Earth's clever and humane Federation should find among the stars the ultimate corporate nightmare, the Borg, who literally incorporated anything that moved and had something to offer, and destroyed anything that did not. The Borg appreciated any good thing they encountered. He had to give them credit for that.

Presently, as he turned his attention away from the killing star to the world beneath the false moon, as he looked at the deep scans of a hauntingly beautiful city dating back more than a thousand centuries and entombed beneath a hundred meters of volcanic ash, he wondered if this was really one of the Borg's beginnings.

A full day was gone from the available thirteen before the neutron star struck, and with every passing hour decisions would be made about what should be explored, what data gathered, before his group had to abandon the Sphere. Now that they had made contact with the Dooglasse, they would also have to consider the possibility that other biological life forms still lived here, and be on guard against any that might be hostile.

Anything that could be added to the Federation's knowledge of the Borg was important enough to override other avenues of exploration. As Rome had wished to add to its knowledge of its chief rival, the north African city of Carthage, so the Federation had to expand its knowledge of the Borg, with however small increments. Clues to their ancestry, and to the ancestry of all humanoid species, might arise from the Dyson homeworld below, or they might lie somewhere in the language of the Dooglasse, buried as deeply as any physical remains.

An electronic beep at his ready room door interrupted his reverie.

"Come," Picard said.

The door opened and Troi entered. "One of the Dooglasse has offered to go down with us to the city," she said. "It's certainly worth a few hours. It's probably the oldest city in all of Dyson, and it's remarkably intact. No other area has turned up from our scans to offer any greater interest."

"Then we're going," Picard replied. "If we have time enough to explore only one square block of the homeworld, especially with the help of one of the Douglasse, this should be it."

"We have so little time here," Troi said, stating the obvious, "that one really wonders what to see first."

"One place after the other, until the little time we have runs out. Our decisions are limited, and some of them are going to be very hard."

"I know," Troi said. "What can possibly become of the Dooglasse? What can we tell them, Captain, if anything? How do you tell an entire race that they're doomed?"

Picard left his painful answer unspoken: You save them, or else you tell them nothing.

Forty Hortas were now on and inside the Dyson homeworld. Picard listened as Jee and Sherd reported that the city appeared to have been unearthed and reconstructed by no fewer than three successive civilizations--each, in its own turn, entombed by the same volcano. The youngest of those civilizations pre-dated the false moon (and by implication the Sphere itself) by more than a thousand years. It had left behind what appeared to be restaurant, on whose flatware a set of oily finger smudges looked as if they had been placed there by a Dyson homeworld only yesterday, although the utensils had to be at least several millennia old.

Each hour, Picard called down the same question: "And how does the excavation go now?" And always Captain Dalen gave the same reply: "Delicious. Delicious."

Picard was anxious to stand by the Horta's side. He felt as if he were being held captive aboard the Darwin, confined to looking out on the universe of Dyson only through large bridge screens or the ready room's desk screens, while discussing emerging logistics problems with Data.

According to the android, Dyson's peculiar motion and the relativistic gunshot were probably the birth cries of open warfare. Warfare between titans. Data believed that the two starships might soon get caught in the crossfire and be forced at a moment's notice to ride the shockwave.

Yet because of the great distances involved, it was a shockwave that moved, from a human perspective, in slow motion. The neutron star fell toward Dyson like the minute hand of an enormous clock, though it, covered more than seven Earth diameters every second. There was actually time to sightsee. Or so it seemed. Or so Picard hoped.

"We'll stay as long as we can," he said, finally. 'Im going down to the surface."

"That may not be wise," Data said from the Enterprise. "We may have to leave quickly, now that Dyson has become unpredictable."

"Dyson has always been unpredictable," said Pi-card, "by sheer definition."

"But never so unpredictable as right now."

Data was correct, Picard had to admit. Under more ordinary conditions, he would have been willing to exercise more caution. Now, however--"The clock is ticking, Data, and knowledge has to be collected quickly, or not at all."

Putting either a real trace of anxiety in his voice, or a very good imitation of it, Data now said, "I have studied your map scans of the buried city, Captain, and find that we can resolve objects as small as coins scattered on the floor of a still-unexcavated meat market."

On Picard's screen, an aerial view of the Cousteau and the Engford appeared, parked beside what appeared to be an open pit mine. "Captain Dalen's away team has exposed a town square," Data continued, "and a number of the streets are accessible as tunnels, and are quite safe. Of course, I think the Hortas and our scans will give us all we need to know..."

"We want to see it for ourselves," Picard replied before Data could renew his recommendation against a physical visit.

Troi glanced at her captain, and Picard knew what she was thinking: You want to see it with your own eyes, feel the ancient dust with your own two hands, incorrigible amateur archaeologist that you are. Troi did not have to say it. They both knew that she was right. The amateur's love was too often absent from the professional mind, and the hope of discovery that Picard knew within himself was one of the great pleasures of his life, to be neglected only at great peril to his mental health.

"Would you like to see this, Mr. Data?" Picard asked.

"Unnecessary, Captain. I have already gained all that I can from the scans. My interest is as great as yours, but without the feelings. I will study the scans for hidden relationships in the information." Troi said, "We should plan for a limited visit." "Quite right, Counselor. Say--two hours?"

"I think we can stretch it to four, Captain." Picard frowned, thinking of the Dooglasse, and how he and his crew and the Hortas might be the only ones to remember them and to record what they could of their civilization. "But where there is life ..." he told himself.

As the dead city faded into view around him, Picard saw that he was materializing in a large square that had been swept, or devoured clean, of volcanic ash. Troi and La Forge stood near him, already surveying the alien site.

The Minoan-style houses stood like squat sentries, at the bottom of a freshly hewn crater. The Horta were efficient miners; and according to Captain Dalen's theory, her people had been built that way. On every side, tunnels plunged into the walls of the pit, and on the land above, smoke from a dozen chimneys stained the otherwise clear blue evening sky. Picard realized that the Horta did not, as he had long believed, devour all the rock through which they passed. In their mining mode, much of it--no, most of it--was either being pressed into the tunnel walls, or vaporized and vented.

"No short-lived nuclides in the ash at all," Geordi said as he made a scan of a half-buried building. "And I'm confirming Captain Dalen's depressed radio argon levels--with near-zero on the carbon-14 scale. I'd say it's every bit as old as she says it is, but it looks like it was buried here only last week."

Picard glanced up at a row of circular windows with their wood and bronze frames still in place. They reminded him of the eyeless sockets of a skull; and he supposed that he might be standing in the square at Thera, ancient Atlantis itself, on the day Marinates found it lying in state in its pumice shroud, and lifted the shroud, and looked underneath.

"Captain," Data called down from the Enterprise.

"Picard here."

"One of the Dooglasse is ready to join you. Shall I have the Darwin beam him down?"

"By all means, Data." As Picard watched, a figure materialized some meters away. It was the Dooglasse who called himself Jani, the smiling spokesman. He was about five feet tall, but seemed taller. He came forward now, extending a hand.

"Captain Picard," he said, "thank you letting-- join."

Was there a trace of irony in the alien's voice? This was, after all, his world, what was left of it, and he needed no permission to visit it.

"Transporter," Jani said, "--ah!"

"I'm glad you liked it."

"Liked? Yes!"

The mind behind the pidgin speech was much sharper than it was letting on, Picard reminded himself.

"Look around?" Jani asked, gesturing.

"Of course," Picard said, "by all means."

Jani turned abruptly and headed for a group of buildings in the southern part of the square.

"I wonder what he's looking for," Geordi said.

"Troi?" Picard asked.

"My feeling," she said, "is that he is looking for something he expects to find here, yet he feels out of place, alienated. I don't get the sense that the Dooglasse are searching for anything specific. They're just hoping to find something that will tell them who they were."

They're wandering around in the remains of their history, Picard thought, trying to imagine--almost as if it might be possible to remember--who they might have been. How many other races lived in the same predicament on the inner surface of this sphere? Thousands, perhaps millions, and with enough room to be unable ever to meet and compare notes. And how much of the same might be said of humankind and the Federation? How much was hidden or hopelessly lost about human, and human-old, galactic origins?

"Captain," Geordi said, "I'd like to take some readings in those houses to the north." He motioned toward a multi-storied building whose door, still on its hinges, seemed to have been thrown invitingly open. "Captain Dalen reports that she will have the ground floor propped up and excavated in two minutes."

"I'll go with you," Troi said.

Picard nodded. The two officers moved away, leaving Picard with the Dooglasse.

It was getting on toward sunset. Picard glanced down at the Dooglasse officer standing next to him. The alien smiled up at him uncertainly, and Picard felt even more deeply now for Jani's plight of unknowing. He could not help but feel more deeply, for there was something disturbing, on a deep instinctive level, about buildings that looked brand new, yet had last seen the light of Dyson's sun more than a tenth of a million years ago. Their vacant windows put him face to face with the fundamental triumph and tragedy of the Dyson Sphere. There was no escaping it, once he had stood under the dome of the sky and felt the ash crunching under his own feet.

Up ahead, a puff of vapor emerged through the doorway, just as Geordi and Troi reached it. There also emerged a muffled shout--as spine chilling as it was shrill--like Horta laughter mingled with a scream.

It took Picard a full fifteen minutes to calm the Dooglasse down.

Geordi came to the open doorway and stopped; Troi halted beside him. The scream had ceased abruptly, as if cut off by the fall of a heavy blade. There was nothing to see inside, for a continuous stream of dry, dust-laden air was jetting through the entrance into Geordi's face. The blast told him that Captain Dalen must still be alive--must, in fact, still be chewing happily away.

"Captain Dalen!" Troi shouted into the dust. "Is everything all right?"

For a long time, no one answered from inside. Then the dust storm abated unexpectedly and the Horta shrieked, "Look at it! Look at it!"

"Picard here," the captain chimed in. "What do you see?"

Geordi peered inside. The Horta-flung dust was warm, thwarting his infrared sensors. He had to wait for the cloud to settle, letting daylight in through the open windows." It's all right, Captain," Geordi said. "I suppose we've just learned that Hortas can't speak and dig at the same time."

Shadows materialized out of the settling dust, becoming less misty and less vague with each passing second. Geordi stepped inside. And then he saw.

Columns of compressed rock supported the weight of the upper floors. Like everything else in the room, the Horta had restored them with astonishing rapidity, yet with seemingly impossible attention to detail. Had the owner of this house returned today, he would have found his chair and his table, and his single glass upon the table, exactly where he had left them a hundred thousand years ago.

But what impressed Geordi the most about the room, and made him sigh with surprise and a deep aesthetic pleasure, was his first glimpse of the frescoes on its walls. As with everything else in the city, time had stolen their beauty hardly at all, and the sudden vision of very humanlike figures, arm in arm before a great ocean, took his breath away.

"Sublime," Troi said.

Captain Dalen motioned toward a pair of body-like mounds, heaped in a corner. Scanning, Geordi saw that they were indeed what they looked like: the remains of living humanoids. He scanned for more detail and was surprised to find, in arrays of hydrogen atoms, the intact skeletons of blood proteins remarkably similar to his own. The history written on the Homeworld' goblin genes was more human than the Dooglasse.

"Look at this," he said, showing his recordings to Troi.

She leaned forward. "Provocative," she said. "It may be that the Dooglasse diverged further from our ancestral type than we did."

"Mitochondrial Eve," Picard murmured.

Captain Dalen directed them toward a back door that opened into a Horta tunnel. Geordi saw a narrow cobblestone road, leading downward. It formed the tunnel floor, and on either side, ancient kiln-fired brick formed the tunnel walls. Geordi followed Dalen and Troi along the alleyway and came to what seemed to be a dry canal bed. Moving to the edge of the stone dock, the three looked down and saw the perfectly preserved remains of a wooden ship, its keel pitched up to face the tunnel roof.

La Forge was delighted by what his scan revealed: "Buried in its hold--what's left of a mechanically operated analogue computer! Gears. And multiple gear shifts."

"For navigation," Troi said.

"Yes!" Geordi said excitedly.

It was easy to forget, in this portal to Dyson's Bronze Age, that in the world outside, an navigable sea wider than Mercury's orbit was rising on the eastern horizon, and that the land on its northern shore curved upward and upward over Dyson's homeworld, and actually formed the homeworld's sky.

Nightfall came on with all the suddenness of a thunderbolt. But it was not so much a true nightfall as it was a change of lighting. Picard stood with Troi, La Forge, and the Dooglasse officer in the middle of the square and watched the strange twilight that now came to the planet. There would be no stars, Picard knew.

A very wide searchlight beam seemed to be tracking slowly down the western rim of the excavation, as if a second sun were rising in the east. At first, the light startled Picard. It was not a sister star. He knew this in a second; and a second later he wondered if something else was coming to life here, and announcing its presence. And a second later he realized that it was the brilliant reflection of the sun off the at once flat yet parabolic surface of the Great Scott Sea.

None of the Sphere's inhabitants could have ever known a night sky of stars, or even a deep night. Their mythologies, Picard surmised, might speak of lights in the sky beyond the wall of heaven, and perhaps of a blackness. Having never seen the universe for themselves, they might have speculated about whether the inner surface went on forever or whether there was something beyond, another space containing their spherical space, and then perhaps yet another...

Now, as this side of Homeworld turned away from the sun, the sky was filling up from horizon to horizon with the incurving wall of the Sphere. In the west, the atmospheric glare of sunset was replaced by the wall behind the sun, shining with the misty whiteness of a thousand full moons. In that direction, Picard knew, lay the coming Ice Age. Directly overhead, according to details revealed on telescopic scans, a river wider than the Nile was long flowed all the way down the dome of heaven, yet it was completely invisible to the captain's unaided eyes, across a span of light minutes. All of the canals Data had been mapping, even an island wider than China and Europe put together, were equally invisible. A hurricane the size of the planet Jupiter, if anything like it could form up there, might go completely unnoticed on the floor of Homeworld.

Jani, the Dooglasse officer, touched Picard's hand. Picard looked down, as if at a curious child.

"You?" the Dooglasse asked. "You .. . from outside?"

"Yes," Picard said.

'Tell. .." said the Dooglasse.

Picard did not answer at once, realizing that it would be against Federation regulations, and against the Prime Directive, to tell the Dooglasse, or any other pre-warp technology species, about the Sphere's coming end.

There could be multiple billions--no, worse: multiple trillions of people as yet undiscovered. Even without a Directive restricting Picard's role to that of a "watcher," it was beyond his powers to evacuate even the tiniest fraction of those trillions aboard Enterprise and Darwin.

He felt torn, and overwhelmed.

What if there was a way to save the Sphere? He had no idea how. But what if?

What, then, of the Prime Directive?

What, then, of regulations?

But this group had a vessel; sub-warp, to be sure-- still. . . they might conceivably survive on their own. Perhaps there were others like the inquisitive Dooglasse who deserved to know as much about their world as they could absorb.

"Later," Picard said, taking in the view, "when I can speak to your whole group."

Jani seemed to accept his answer. Then, as they watched in silent wonder, a lake of amber on the distant inner surface caught the rays of the setting sun like a bronze shield, and threw the light back into space. The lake must have been wider than forty Jupiters, to blaze into such beauty. It was gone in a moment, as the angle of incident reflection with their eyes was lost.

Gone in a moment, Picard emphasized for himself. What point would there be in telling even this one Dooglasse about the universe outside? What would be accomplished? What would be saved? More puffs of smoke jetted from the old, multi-storied building--from the upper floors, this time. Captain Dalen was busy and seemingly happy. The Horta, too, had once been pre-warp. She, too, had once lived unaware of the universe outside. But the starship captain remembered and so honored by her people had--

Had what?

Broken the chain of command? Done the right thing for the wrong reason? Or done the wrong thing for the right reason?

What would you do, old Captain Kirk? Picard asked himself. And he knew the answer at once; and Troi put a hand gently upon his arm, and a look of startled surprise crossed her face.

"The Prime Directive?" she asked.

"I believe that I'm about to interpret our orders . . . creatively, Counselor," he replied.
