The Furnace Below, The Firmament Above

WHEN PICARD HAD completed his presentation, the Dooglasse sitting in front of him in the Darwin's large conference room were so silent that he could hear the gentle rasping sound of their breathing. It was done; he had told them everything. Now, the Dooglasse knew that their homeworld and their star, and the Sphere that contained them, were mere specks in a galaxy one hundred and fifty thousand light years wide, containing six hundred million stars, in a universe containing at least as many galaxies.

Picard glanced at Captain Dalen, who sat on the floor at his side. It had been necessary to tell the Dooglasse everything, even if that meant shattering all of their myths and misconceptions about the ceiling at the end of their universe. They had seemed so eager to break out of their ignorance--or their innocence--and they possessed the means to at least leave the Sphere before the neutron star arrived.

"You are," Picard said to Jani, "already somewhat acclimated to the idea of 'outside.'"

"Yes," Jani replied, "I see it, I think of outside, but--"

"What can be outside the universe?" another of the Dooglasse asked.

"Are you saying that the heavens are no more than--"

"I see a sky, and you show that I am inside a ball?"

The Dooglasse were all chattering at once; he could no longer make out their questions.

"Stop," Captain Dalen said suddenly. The Dooglasse abruptly stopped talking and leaned toward the Horta officer hi unison.

"I have lived through the paradox of the outside," Dalen went on. "I myself come from a race who once lived beneath the surface of our world, believing that there could be nothing beyond it. Space was something we created as we made our tunnels and passages, not something vast outside our world that was filled with stars and galaxies. Had the human beings--the ones like this Picard--not come to my planet, we would be burrowing still and creating space and running out of space to create."

Jani made a motion with one of his arms. To Picard, it looked as if the Dooglasse was telling Dalen to continue.

"The real universe," the Horta said, "is a finite yet unbounded sphere whose center is everywhere and whose edge is nowhere. "You can move outside your Sphere, you can step outside it and view it. But no one can step outside of the much greater sphere that we call the universe."

Dalen continued to speak, telling the Dooglasse of the stars and galaxies and the true scale of what lay outside the universe of their Sphere. Even through the alien expressions, Picard could easily recognize both understanding and disbelief in their faces and subtly alien body language, convincing him even more that humankind indeed shared a distant human kinship with the Dooglasse.

Captain Dalen paused. Picard watched the audience of Dooglasse. The look that came into Jani's face, and into the faces of some of the others, was that of children who had heard a most horrific story but still wished for the story to continue. He and Dalen, Picard thought, had read to them from the true Book of Revelations, with the worst still to come.

He waited until he felt they were ready to hear the rest, until all of them were looking expectantly at him. "There is more," Picard murmured. "This is very hard for me to say, and it will be much harder for you to hear. You will have to leave the Sphere you have always thought of as your universe. "You will have to travel outside of it if you are to save yourselves, because your giant Sphere--your universe--will be destroyed in.eleven of our days."

They were silent for so long that he wondered if they had understood him, and then they began to talk among themselves, clearly distressed, and a mournful, keening sound came into their voices. First, they had been faced with what could only be called metaphysical dislocation, and now they had to deal with the terror of doom.

But they would be able to leave, Picard reminded himself1. He had told them so, they were accepting it, and now he and Dalen would have to start working them up to constructive action as quickly as possible.

CAPTAIN'S LOG, STARSHIP ENTERPRISE

IMPACT MINUS 11 DAYS EGRESS MINUS 8,5 DAYS

There is a question that resists resolution, yet refuses to go away: How many other races are there inside the Sphere, the uncounted thousands of them?

And on the heels of this question: How many, among those thousands, would react as well as the Dooglasse have? And-is it possible to warn them all? Or even to find them?

As for the Dooglasse: in their ship and in their bodies they carry all the evidence that is likely to be found in the time remaining of their kinship with the galaxy's humanoid past. What good this might do in humanity's future dealings with the Borg is questionable, but it is not a matter to be decided here and now.

"Enterprise to Darwin," Data said over the subspace link.

Picard, sitting forward of Captain Dalen's bridge command station in one of the Horta saddles, answered the call. "Picard here." The captain of the Enterprise was holding the helmsman's position as the call came in, remembering his younger days.

"Captain, I have concluded from precise measurements of the Sphere's motion and position that, as we have suspected, it is indeed capable of dodging the neutron star."

Picard frowned. Good news, to be sure, but he could swear he heard some reservations in Data's voice.

"Now give me the bad news, Mr. Data," he said.

"In a word, Captain: inertia. As you know, clouds and oceans are held in place on the walls of the Sphere by independently generated subspace fields that, even during spurts of acceleration, defeat inertia and maintain the illusion of normal gravity. But the fields dissipate rapidly beyond a radius of thirty kilometers above the inner surface; and beyond that radius, inertia is winning. "Picard glanced aft at Geordi La Forge and Lieutenant Kar, who were both at the engineering station. Geordi nodded at him, as if agreeing with Data. Kar made a shivering motion that seemed to be the Horta equivalent of a nod.

Picard said, "Odd, then--that the Sphere would have the ability to move, yet be filled with fields never intended to operate outside of continental and oceanic boundaries."

"Or, at least, filled with fields that are failing to do so, Captain. Nevertheless, something is attempting to make do, trying to keep the sun in its central position as the Sphere moves, by using all the grappler beams from the portals to move the Sphere without leaving behind the sun and planetary bodies."

"Will this succeed?" Picard asked.

"Briefly, and to a very small degree, it will. There may be a few days' respite, but I doubt it will matter. As the Sphere dodges the neutron star, the central sun and its planet are accumulating an inertia! lag and will eventually strike the inner surface of the sphere. There simply does not seem to be enough energy, at least in the way it is being used, to prevent it Of course, I am projecting from current use."

"Might not the energy output increase?" Picard asked.

"Unknown, Captain. If this is an automatic system at work, it may be defective. If intelligence of some kind is at work, it may be working to correct the problem."

Utterly fantastic, Picard thought. Astrobiologists and astrophysicists, working solely from data obtained during the first encounter with the Sphere, had concluded that Dyson was the fossil remnant of an extinct culture. Now it was living and breathing and doing the impossible: It was moving the equivalent mass of two hundred light years of stars, however failingly, out of harm's way.

Dead world indeed! The captain told himself again.

And what was it that Data had suggested about intelligence of some kind at work, trying perhaps to fine-tune the grappler beams, trying to drag the sun and the homeworld along? Was it machine intelligence? Or was some distant descendant of the Dysons taking control? And if so, where might he hope to find them, in any of possible dozens of millions of tiny city-states strewn across Dyson's walls?

"Where do you think the control center for all this might be?" Picard asked. "Perhaps we could make . . . adjustments, or lend our assistance."

"Of course, it is doubtful we will have time to find it," Data said, and Picard nodded in agreement. If only it had been possible to bring the Enterprise inside, to add its great scanning power to the Darwin's; but the risk was unwarranted. The Enterprise had to stay outside; even if the lock system could be made to work, too much would be at stake to risk trusting the gate while both ships were inside. So little time to do anything, Picard thought. If the neutron star did not destroy the sphere, its own sun would tear it apart from within. It seemed to Picard that two very old giants had come awake and resumed a family feud. And the starships, a pair of fleas crawling around on and in one of the giants, were not smart enough to leap away.

And it gets worse, Picard told himself: Imagine that they're feuding in a lake of gasoline, and each holds a loaded flare gun--wormhole technology would serve this analogy well--and then imagine that at least one of the giants is senile.

"Just a moment, Captain," Data said, "some new information is coming in. Yes, I think I know where an inertial control system for the sun might be, and it is in the logical place--orbiting the sun, very close in, three clearly artificial objects."

"Prepare to depart orbit," the Horta captain was already saying behind Picard. "Make course."

"Aye, Captain Dalen," Picard answered, setting coordinate scans for the position Data had provided. "Away team! Prepare to depart in the next five minutes. We're readying to leave orbit."

"Captain Picard," the Horta said from her command station, "shall we transport the Dooglasse from their ship back to ours once more and take them all with us?"

The question took Picard back for a moment, and he considered. There was no telling what state their ship was in. It might not have what would be required to exit the Sphere at the crucial hour.

The Darwin cruised sunward, laying down a wake of micro-ripples through otherwise fiat spacetime as heat from the cauldron of protons striking antiprotons was dumped effortlessly into subspace. Any large, thick-walled ship not equipped with subspace heat dumps would have been reduced to an expanding ball of plasma the moment its captain ordered up impulse power.

Following slowly in the Darwin's wake, falling light minutes behind, the Dooglasse engineers did not know subspace, so their ship was little more than a web of ultra light tethers, magnetic field lines, and minute shadow shields. Their matter-antimatter reaction zone burned in open space, meaning that its gamma flare was dumped effortlessly into space itself by a ship that was never intended to intercept and absorb the rays--a fact that had rendered the Dooglasse engine easily detectable on the Darwin's sensors.

Jani, to Picard's mind, still seemed to be struggling with the idea that there could be something "outside" capable of destroying his entire known universe. He had turned down Picard's offer to beam his crew aboard the Darwin, explaining that they must travel in their own ship, which had been so long in becoming as serviceable as it was. When Picard offered to send in a team to check out and perhaps improve the ancient systems, Jani responded with apparent gratitude, but again asked that his group be left to its own resources. Picard understood their pride, and Troi had pointed out that this was a necessary form of self reliance, still growing, which the Dooglasse would need after the Sphere was gone.

Recording every neutrino, quantum fluctuation, string gyration, photon, and electron in its path, the Darwin detected the presence of three small objects, each about six meters across, orbiting so close to the sun that they occasionally dipped below its upper atmosphere.

Picard watched them on the viewscreen for a while. "What do you make of these . . . sun divers?" he finally asked Data over the link.

"Whiskers," Data replied. "They have tendrils no wider than a cat's whiskers; but kilometers long. Subspace mapping suggests that they are acting as transmission lines between the tractor beams and a whole array of whiskered objects circling the sun's core. I would approach cautiously, Captain."

"Understood," replied Captain Dalen from her station.

One of the objects became visible on the screen. It seemed an ancient armored thing, vaguely resembling a silvered version of the fossil cephalopod whose coiled, pearly white shell was among the few Earthly reminders Picard had chosen to decorate the Enterprise's ready room. The "whiskers" emerged from the place where the cephalopod's head and tentacles ought to have been; and as Picard watched, they flashed out across two hundred and twenty subspace dimensions.

"Data?" the captain asked from his helmsman's station.

"I would say this is one of the control devices from which the attempt to steer the Sphere is coming," Data's voice replied. "Also, an attempt to drag the central sun's core along, and hence the sun itself, and its orbiting homeworld."

"And the energy to do this is being drawn from the star," Picard ventured; then, as if on cue, the whiskers gleamed even brighter through subspace. Simultaneously, the Sphere's wall added another spurt of acceleration, and the solar luminosity dimmed by one half of one percent. The screen showed five grapplers coming suddenly to life on the distant, snow-covered side of the Sphere; they flickered weakly, unable to get a firm grip on the objects--the hundreds of them--that formed a necklace around the sun's core. As they watched, the distance between the furnace and the snow widened.

Another grappler came on.

And another.

And another.

And solar luminosity dropped another quarter of one percent. Then another. And another.

"If I may posit a theory," Data said, "if the instability observed in this star when we discovered Montgomery Scott's ship had only very recently begun--"

"Yes," Picard interrupted, "I was coming to that conclusion myself."

"Then the star must not really have been dead when we found it--or even dying, but merely awakening."

"Transmitting power to the Sphere walls?" Picard asked. "Even before we found Montgomery Scott?"

"Powering up for the dodge maneuver?"

"Perhaps so," said Picard. "In which case, Dyson truly was anticipating, somehow, the arrival of the neutron star. It knew it was about to be attacked."

"Well, there's something you don't see every day," said Captain Dalen. "Your archaeological site comes alive and starts fighting with another archaeological site."

Picard glanced back at the Horta. "But right now," he said, "the question is: Do you think we should try to approach the whiskers and correct the system's defects?"

"That might save the Sphere," Data replied, "assuming we can ever learn how the transmitters work."

Picard nodded his head, very slowly. "I know, Data. So many unheard of quantum spatial dimensions. It may take a hundred years of learning."

"Or a thousand," Captain Dalen said matter-of-factly.

"Yes," Picard said. "And in the meantime, I feel like a Neanderthal walking into a modern day engine room, trying to pry loose its secrets with a stone axe. A hopeless venture."

"And quite dangerous," Data reminded.

"But warranted," Captain Dalen decided, "even if the risk to the Darwin is large and the chance at saving the Sphere small."

"Yes, Captain," said Captain Picard.

And as the Dooglasse dropped behind, the off-center star swelled to a screen scape of fiery prominences and magnetic trenches. One of the whiskered cephalopods was crossing the sun's face, and it seemed for a moment that it was a black opening in the star, revealing the space beyond, except that no stars shone in the deep well.

"Slow ahead," Captain Dalen said. "Make parallel orbit to the station."

"Aye," Picard replied, pressing another panel on his console.

Deep within the solar corona, and down to a velocity of five hundred kilometers per second, the Darwin matched speed with the station, about ten kilometers off. One of its whiskers drifted a hundred meters to starboard, another approached a hundred meters to port, then held position.

"Data," Picard said to the Enterprise, "is it safe to let those whiskers get any closer?"

"The subspace distortions do not rise beyond a radius of two millimeters from the whiskers, unless you happen to be standing where a whisker is pointing."

"Otherwise, it should be safe," the Horta captain announced, "so long as we do not get brushed by the whiskers themselves."

"Then we'll stay. Nothing is more important, at least for the next day, than the possibility that we can adjust the inertial controls and prevent the sun from crashing through the Sphere wall."

"Kar!" Captain Dalen called. "La Forge! Are we positioned for gamma ray CAT scan?"

Lieutenant Kar shifted her body in her saddle. "I've already begun, Captain," the Horta engineer said.

"The subject is passing directly between us and the sun," Geordi added. "Sorry, Captain. It isn't working. The sun's rays just aren't strong enough for even a few of them to get through the shell. The station is either absorbing them--all of them--or deflecting them. Impossible to tell. It's all just one big data drop-out."

Picard turned and looked at Troi, who had just come onto the bridge and was now seated on the Horta captain's right.

"I had hoped we could probe it passively," Picard said, "without it detecting that it was being probed."

Troi nodded her agreement with his first plan, although it seemed to him that she might have wanted to suggest that they refrain from plans to beam Geordi's so-called "walnuts," or anything else onto or worse yet, beneath the transmitter's shell.

The Horta captain let out what seemed a deep growl. "Whiskers coming at us. All shields up full!" she shouted.

At his helmsman's position, Picard focused on the screen--gone to maximum, now, at the first sign of something approaching from outside. He plunged Darwin's prow straight down; but as the whiskers on starboard and port closed above, three more whipped up from below, brushing gently past the vessel's stern, missing the hull by mere centimeters--perhaps as much for their own protection as for ours, Picard thought.

He had just been scanned, thoroughly scanned; he was convinced of it. This ship, and his whole body.

He knew it.

He felt it in the skip of his artificial heart.

The alien station continued its traversal of the solar face.

It suddenly went black, then flashed out blindingly white--blinding even against the brilliance of the sun. For three unendurably long seconds the Darwin shook from stem to stern, shook so violently that her subspace gravitic fields could not completely overcome inertia. Picard managed to look aft and saw that even Dalen was finding it impossible to steady herself in the saddle.

He saw the screen readings drop below ten percent power as a solar flare, pointing at him like a giant accusing finger, struck the Darwin with planet-cracking force.

That was deliberate, Picard told himself. No doubt of it: Dyson's off-center star was the center of its immune system, and it was responding to an irritant.

"All decks!" Captain Dalen called out. "Damage reports."

Picard listened to the answers. Damage was minimal, but the impulse engines were laboring, and seemingly ineffectively. That accusing finger had flicked the Darwin out of solar orbit as if it were a gnat... or a microbe . . . All controls seemed locked, unable to slow or maneuver.

Picard brought up the view-forward. It showed the inner surface, more than sixty million kilometers ahead, and he realized that if the Darwin failed to slow, it would strike what now seemed only a distant lake, but was in reality a vast ocean some one hundred million kilometers across from shore to shore, and now only light minutes away.

Picard knew only too well that without full impulse power, the Darwin would reach that ocean in less than five hours.

"Can we slow?" Picard asked.

"We took a heavy blow, with thwarted force screens," Captain Dalen replied. "Repairs are proceeding, but our direction and velocity seem locked. It may be beyond repair in the time we have." Picard heard no emotion in the Horta's voice.

"Riker--Data!" Picard called out. "Did you get that?"

"Yes, Captain," Riker said.

"Data?"

"Downrange distance thirteen light seconds," Data replied. "You may have to abandon the Darwin."

"No!" cried the Horta. "We will make repairs, no matter what it takes."

"There may be no time," Picard said.

"We will make time!" Captain Dalen cried out, and for an instant Picard believed, though impact on the Great Scott Sea seemed a mathematical certainty, that the Horta would indeed gain time and save the Darwin. She would not allow herself to doubt that until she had no alternative.

"Jee!" the Horta captain continued. "Sherd! To the engine room on the double!"
