The Interrupted Journey

THE GREAT SCOTT SEA grew balefully on the Darwin's bridge screen, sweeping up ahead like the galaxy's largest flyswatter. On the eastern shore, vast stretches of alternating desert and forest blended undetectably into a uniform greenish-brown. Picard saw that they were breaking up into tiny speckles, now. Deserts as wide as the Earth's moon were becoming visible: white dots against a background of green.

"Impact in sixteen minutes ten seconds," Data called from the Enterprise, and the eastern shore drifted slowly aft. "Sixteen minutes ..."

"Slowing our descent," Captain Dalen announced from her station, "but we will not be able to slow it enough to turn away."

Beeps sounded on the bridge. Lights flashed on the panels in front of Picard. One Horta officer on the port side of the bridge slid off her saddle at one station, making a soft scraping sound as she moved across the floor, then quickly pulled herself into another saddle.

The hit from the alien sun station, Picard saw from the readings on his console, had thrown whole sectors of the Darwin's control systems into chaos. Even though resetting and repairs were now commencing, they were still a labor intensive, interminable series of diagnostics, commands, and physical restructurings. The Darwin's engineer, Kosh, had come to the bridge; she sat at the engineering station, murmuring instructions to the ship's computer. La Forge and Kar had rushed down to the engine room, to aid the crew there.

Full control, Picard realized, might come only within that last second separating the ship from the sea; or it might come a second too late.

As islands and great streamers of cloud cover expanded to fill the entire forward view, Picard faced up again to Data's supposition that the Darwin might well have to be abandoned. Anywhere near this velocity, their first contact with Dyson's atmosphere would leave no time to call out to the Enterprise for help. They would be dead even before they knew they were about to die. Yet he hesitated to bring the Enterprise in or to give the captain of the Darwin a direct order to prepare for beam-out. As leader of the expedition to the Dyson Sphere, he had the final word, but he hesitated nonetheless. His instincts were telling him to ride this one out, to trust in Dalen and her ship.

"We're decelerating," Captain Dalen said, "but we still cannot steer."

On the screen, the Great Scott Sea was now a perfectly flat wall of water. Instruments gave the distance, but to the eye all comparisons were lost. A new chain of islands came into view and began to grow, and for a moment Picard's perspective shifted.

Was there still time, he wondered, to bring the Enterprise in, even if he wanted to?

"Still no steering," Captain Dalen announced, "but still decelerating."

"Check all shields!" Lieutenant Jee called out to the crew in Main Engineering. Four Horta engineers sat in pits around the engine room's master systems display console, occasionally poking at a button or panel with a rocky extrusion, as they struggled to regain control of their ship.

Geordi glanced at the wall, where lights flashed on the master situation monitor. They were in big trouble, he realized; the diagram of the Darwin was lit up like a Christmas tree. The steering was still out, the shields failing.

Geordi bent over the console in front of him. The impulse engines were faltering. An alarm suddenly sounded, indicating that the Darwin's matter-antimatter reaction core chamber was close to a plasma breach.

He was about to warn Jee of the danger when the Horta commanded, "Lower first section isolation door!" Main Engineering was safe for now; Geordi hoped that they would not have to activate the containment force fields to protect this station, which would drain even more power. They needed time; they could regain control only if they had a little more time to make repairs.

But there wasn't any time left. It looked as if the ship was indeed falling a second too far.

Picard asked himself if Captain Dalen was capable of taking the ship to its destruction, leaving no time for the crew to escape. The Darwin, an exploratory vessel, carried two smaller craft, but they were as large as small ships and carried equipment far in excess of standard shuttles. They would be enough to carry away the crew into the great space of the Sphere, and reach the lock, which would then be triggered; and the Enterprise would collect the emerging orphans.

Picard turned in his saddle. "Captain Dalen," he said, knowing that the shuttles had also been disabled by the attack, "repairs on the Balboa and the Engford?"

Troi had sensed a recklessness in Captain Dalen and the other Hortas, a willingness--almost an eagerness--to take risks. Now, sitting on the bridge, watching them monitor readings and whisper orders to one another, she sensed determination in the Darwin's captain and her crew, but not fear, not even a trace of fear.

Were these beings completely fearless? she wondered. Perhaps their silicon carapaces and their long lives made them think that they were invulnerable.

Suddenly she felt something else from Captain Dalen. There was a longing inside the Horta, a longing for--what? Vivid, intense experiences to fill the rest of her extremely long life? A desire to feel the danger she faced fully, so that if she survived, the memory of her close encounter with death would make her savor the remaining centuries of her life all the more? Troi sensed all of that, and more, inside Captain Dalen, but there were still no traces of dread, and the counselor feared what might happen next.

The Darwin was falling toward the upper cloud decks now, still decelerating, but glowing cherry-red, as Picard and the others on the bridge waited for word from engineering.

"Engineering?" Captain Dalen asked, her voice sharp. "We must have navigational control in the next three minutes!"

"Doing our best," Lieutenant Commander Kosh said from her station, a tone of resignation in her amplified voice.

"We're working on it," Geordi's voice added from Main Engineering.

"Will we have it?" sang Captain Dalen.

"If it's possible," Kosh replied in almost a whisper.

As they waited in silence, a horizon-spanning streamer of clouds leapt up at them, boomed ions, then parted; and suddenly the ocean burst into view below.

"Twenty percent of navigational control restored!" the voice of a Horta sang out from Main Engineering.

It was not enough, but Picard suddenly knew what Dalen was going to do with it. As deceleration continued, she brought the full twenty percent of navigational power into play, raising the Darwin's prow as much as possible.

Nothing happened for a moment; then a pocket of hypersonic air caught the ship from below and her hull began to quake and roar. Picard hung on to his console as his saddle shook under him; he heard a sound like that of a stone chipping against stone as a Horta on his left fell from her saddle and hit the floor. Slowly the Darwin levelled off some one thousand meters above the water and rode over it, still decelerating. Picard realized that no more repairs could be counted on in the next two minutes. Atmospheric drag and lift, together with deceleration, would have to serve.

"Picard to Riker."

"Riker here."

"We're going into the water."

"At what speed?"

"As slowly as possible. There's no other way to stop and make repairs."

On the forward view the ocean was rushing beneath the Darwin like a sheet of blue light, more quickly on the human scale than the unperceived swiftness of passage between the stars. The human eye liked comparisons, and did not believe in motion without them.

"More effort into navigation and deceleration," shouted Captain Dalen.

"Negative," a voice from Main Engineering said. "This is as slow and controlled as we'll get."

"Set us down," Captain Dalen said. "The water will slow us, if we land gently enough."

Picard braced himself, since the crew could not rely on the ship's usual inertial control----And the Darwin touched, and skipped, and touched again, shooting forward but slowing.

Picard's body wanted to continue forward in time-honored Newtonian fashion, but he had never been a man for fashion. He held himself in his saddle, knowing full well that momentum could easily be stronger than a man's grip on a physical object; but he held----And the ship slowed to a strong plowing motion across the water, stopped, and started to sink.

Picard knew that the vessel was not taking water, but a starship was not a submarine. It would sink until it reached equilibrium with the sea and could sink no more.

Troi hurried toward the Horta officer who had fallen to the floor, but that Horta was moving now, apparently unharmed. Captain Dalen was already getting reports from sick bay about injuries aboard ship.

"Captain Picard," Data said from the Enterprise, as if Darwin's safe landing had never been in doubt.

"Picard here."

"The Sphere's attempts to avoid the neutron star continue badly. The central sun is failing to be pulled along by the grapplers, and is drifting toward your position, relatively speaking. If no corrections are made, and if the Sphere continues with its fits and starts of acceleration, the sun will strike the Great Scott Sea in approximately six days ..."

"Where, exactly, will the sun set?" Picard asked.

"Right where you are standing," came the reply.

"And that will be bad, right?" the Horta captain sang.

". .. Yes," Data said hesitantly, as if confused by the black humor of the situation. "If you had managed to establish a link with one of the control stations, we might have made it possible to keep the sun out of the water."

Riker said, "I'm sending in a shuttle with Crusher, Worf, and Guinan, to give you a hand. I know you may not need it, but I want to feel better about that lock opening reliably, so here's a chance to test it again. Guinan, by the way, insisted on going, and I have a feeling she might be of use there."

"We're caring for our injured, Commander Riker," Captain Dalen replied. "Mostly mild concussions and the odd exoskeletal chip, but nothing life-threatening."

"What about your ship?"

"We're afloat now, half down in the water. I think we can make repairs and be able to lift off."

"How soon?" Riker asked.

"As soon as our programs can be rebuilt."

"You may have to leave in your shuttles," Riker said, "if the ship ..."

"Shuttles and ship," Captain Dalen said, "are in the same state of jumbled control programs. They will be repaired at the same time. Besides, abandoning the Darwin is not a good idea."

"Compared to what?" Troi muttered under her breath as she returned to her station near Dalen.

"Captain Picard," Riker said, "if the Darwin or your shuttles can't lift, we'll have to shuttle you out."

Picard hesitated. "A day will tell what we can repair," he said, knowing full well that in the last possible resort the Enterprise herself would have to enter the Sphere to effect rescues. It could be done, he supposed, with shuttles standing outside to trigger the lock if necessary. He had to think ahead, to all possible outcomes, whatever the actual outcome. And Captain Dalen, he was certain, was thinking in the same way. The Horta had seen more than a few strange outcomes in her long life.
