Voices From the Past

THE SHUTTLECRAFT NOSED DOWN toward a chain of little white clouds and islands sprinkled over a sea that was flat and blue-green and impossibly vast. Beverly Crusher gazed at the small viewscreen near her as the specks slowly swelled in size. There was the hiss of increasingly dense air against the hull, and a perceptible shudder in the floor panels. The prow nosed down another five degrees and Beverly, tensing herself, glanced to her right, where Worf sat at the Feynman's controls.

"We will be at the Darwin's side in two minutes," he announced.

For Riker to send Worf to help the Darwin made sense; the Klingon's courage could be trusted in any crisis. For her part, Crusher was sure that her medical skills would be useful, even if treating Horta patients might require as much knowledge of masonry as of surgery. But Guinan's reasons for wanting to come along with them were a mystery. There was, Crusher thought, no real reason for Guinan to be here.

She turned toward the bartender, who was seated on her left. Guinan wore her usual serene, Buddha-like smile; she glanced at Crusher and nodded, as if to reassure her.

"This is truly something to see," Guinan murmured. "I didn't want to miss a chance to explore even a little bit of it," but then her eyes clouded, as if she were thinking of something else. Crusher recalled the crew's earlier speculations about the origins of the Sphere. She had dismissed the notion that ancestors of the Borg might be its builders, but now, with Guinan at her side, that possibility nagged at Crusher again.

Could that be what had driven Guinan to insist on coming with them? Maybe she was convinced that the people who had all but exterminated her species were indeed the creators of this wonder. Was she here to admire the artifact, Crusher wondered, or to rejoice in its devastation?

The Darwin was not quite a submarine, Picard reminded himself as he emerged through a manual service hatch and stood on top of the vessel under a cloudy sky. Engineering had finally killed all forward propulsion, so the ship was not even much of an ocean-going vessel. Standing on the hull was difficult, at best. Under the influence of the internal subspace fields, all the decks had seemed perfectly level; it was not until he actually climbed outside that Picard realized Darwin was angled down by the bows, nearly twenty degrees.

They were adrift near a group of islands, awaiting repairs and waiting also for Beverly Crusher, Worf, and Guinan to arrive. The sea was as calm as a quarry pool, and there was not the whisper of a breeze. But this would change, Picard knew. Bathy-metric scans had shown that the sea surface was getting hotter already, progressively hotter. Unless someone, or something, in Dyson took control, the progression would continue until atoms of hydrogen and oxygen, dissociated from water, raced away from this place hotter than live steam, hotter than molten glass, hotter than aluminum composite emerging white from a furnace.

There was a clap of thunder overhead, the sonic boom of the Feynman as it slowed to subsonic flight. Picard watched the shuttlecraft drop through the clouds and approach his position, then gave a wave and touched his communicator.

"It is good to see you, Captain," Worf said over the comm.

"Sorry we can't let you into the shuttle bay," Picard replied, "but I think there's room to anchor up top."

"Yes, Captain, I have already programmed the landing parameters. We will just fit behind you."

Picard flagged the shuttlecraft in for final approach to the Darwin's stern, and the Feynman crossed a small opening in the clouds, through which the vastness of the Dyson Sphere's far inner surface was partly visible--a sky of land beyond the sky, covering the sky of stars below itself--and he thought of Dylan Thomas's lines of poetry: "They shall have stars at elbow and foot. . . And death shall have no dominion." Except that death was coming to this great inward shore, threatening with two stars--the interior sun, almost at elbow, now, and the onrushing neutron star, at foot.

The shuttlecraft swooped in and hovered over the impulse engines, then settled onto the flat plain just aft of the bridge. Picard breathed deeply of the Sphere's ancient air, and went forward to greet his crewmembers.

Beverly Crusher came out first, followed by Worf and Guinan. "Captain," the physician said, moving past him toward an open hatch, "looks like I'll be getting some experience with Horta physiology after all--" and then, looking around, she added, "but, damn it all, Jean-Luc; do you always have to cut these things so close?"

"Close, Beverly? We had whole seconds to spare."

"Captain Picard," Worf said, "the Dyson Sphere is going from bad to worse. I think we should leave as soon as the Darwin is fit again, while we can do so without great difficulty."

"You may be right," Picard said, suddenly gazing past Worf to the islands in the distance, clearly visible with absolutely no fall-off beyond the horizon. This was a feature distinctive of the flattest place in the universe. But he was forced to remind himself that it was only an apparent flatness, born of the widest curved space ever built. Einstein had been forced to struggle with a similar problem while attempting to probe the even more exotic concept of spacetime curvature--meaning, the entire universe: "Most people are confused by curved space," the physicist had declared, "even those who must live in curved spaces."

Confusion. This artifact has the power to overwhelm, Picard warned himself. I must be careful.

Confusion . . .

It seemed that a strange singing sound was coming from the islands, as if something were vibrating just beyond the range of his hearing ...

He broke the spell and noticed that Guinan was watching him carefully. She walked down the slanting hull and stood beside him, and he wondered what she was thinking.

He said, "Those islands are only a random sample of what this world has to offer, by way of secrets, and probably the last such sample we'll ever have."

"We have time to see them," Guinan said softly, as if she knew something or someone there. She seemed to be straining to listen.

"I will come along, Captain," Worf said, and Picard could not help but hear his security officer's unspoken words: "The captain of the Enterprise should not put himself in danger." Except that this mission was intended to involve the captain from the start, and there was nothing Worf could do except to be present and protective.

As the Klingon climbed into the cockpit of the Feynman, something on "those islands" beckoned to Picard, like the Sirens of Greek mythology. The still air brought strangeness, and he thought of how death had been prophesied to Odysseus--"It shall come to you out of the sea, death in his gentlest guise."

"Troi to Picard."

He touched his communicator. "Picard here."

"Dr. Crusher is assisting with the injured-- mostly concussions," Troi's voice continued. "Repairs should be complete in about twelve hours, Captain Dalen estimates."

"Then we do have time to see the islands," Picard said. "Maybe we even have time enough to take another stab at the sun--from afar, next try, and maybe--just maybe we can change--"

Guinan put a hand to the side of his face, and something infinitely joyful yet shocking ran through him like lightning through salt water. "You will change nothing," she whispered, "except your own decided course."

"What?"

"Nothing lasts forever, Jean-Luc; not our great machines, and least of all us. Time will have its say. It always does."

"My decided course?" he said.

"Remember, they say time--"

"--Is the fire in which we burn," he finished for her, and she took her hand away from his face.

"Remember," she said again. "Remember."

Picard could not remember when he had seen a sea so calm. Worf, at the controls, skimmed the Feynman like a hypersonic stealth fighter over the island group, making a proud, wide arc at treetop level, then stopping abruptly in midair and climbing.

Viewed from on high, the islands were a chain of circular green patches, floating like waterlilies on a vast pond. The first island was the largest, and it now revealed a startling sight: a circle-within-circles strewn field of broken porcelain tiles, criss-crossed by bridge supports and canals. Picard checked his panel sensors and knew that his ears had been right: A high-pitched sound was rising from the ruins.

"Beautiful," Guinan said. "Like Plato's description of lost Atlantis."

"Do you somehow know this place?" Picard asked, wondering.

"No, Captain," she said, smiling. "I haven't been here before."

"Then why did you ask to come?" he said, thinking again of the intricacies of their relationship. It was one he did not fully understand; but he also felt that he did not have to understand it, now, soon, or ever. Like the Horta, Guinan could look back across centuries of life, lovers, children, and hurts--her civilization had been erased by the Borg--and yet still she looked forward with the constructive efforts that she had brought to the Enterprise.

"I have come," she said at last, "to help as much as I can."

As Worf set the shuttle down in a perfectly white square, Picard thought of the fragility of porcelain, and reminded himself that once shattered by the moving sun, the Sphere could not be mended. Guinan's words therefore puzzled him, because she would know better than anyone that not very much could be done for the inhabitants of Dyson. Yet she was not here simply to explore.

"I came to help," Guinan continued, "that's all."

The clouds parted when they came out of the shuttle, revealing a blazing sun and a white-surfaced city of collapsed porcelain towers and terraced pools. A breeze rose suddenly from the sea and screamed thinly through the ruins. The sun had stopped in the sky, much as the Bible said it once stopped for Joshua; and because of that miraculous paradox, that miraculous inertia, it was going to actually set--in a manner of speaking.

How to turn back the miracle?

That was the question.

Picard and Guinan came to the edge of a canal, then gazed down into water that was as blue as a steel mirror. Guinan took his arm and pulled him back from the edge. He glanced at her questioningly, then looked back in time to see a large squid-like creature rising from the smooth surface. It put out tentacles onto the white walkway, pulled itself halfway out of the water, and seemed to wait.

"Intelligent beings," Guinan said. "I felt their presence from the shuttlecraft when we were inside the Sphere."

Picard saw others darting underneath the water, some moving so swiftly that he could barely glimpse them. Calmly, he asked, "How many of these people do you suppose live here?"

"Around only these islands?"

Picard nodded.

"I don't have to suppose. I am picking it up now. Thousands. Five or six thousand."

Picard felt the muscles of his face tighten. "And how many more--across the expanse of this entire sea?"

"Billions."

"Nooo. . ."

"And that's just one race."

"I don't think the authors of the Prime Directive visualized this situation, do you?"

Guinan said nothing. This time she did not even shake her head. Like a skilled bartender, she seemed to realize that her role was to be part philosopher, part psychiatrist, and part psychic.

"I wonder if they know what will happen," Picard said.

Guinan gazed intently at the creature for a few moments. Its tentacles were moving in what looked like signals of some kind. "They know," she said, "that a great danger is coming. My sense of them is that they know something is wrong, and has been wrong for a very long time. They have been dying off for millennia. When I tell you there are a few billion of them, I'm telling you that their numbers are down to billions."

Picard's communicator chimed and he tapped it. Worf, calling from his post at the Feynman, said, "Captain, Commander Riker says we have to get the Darwin out of here in the next ten hours. If we cannot, he will send in more shuttlecraft, or else come in himself."

"There's still time," Picard said, feeling the sun against his face. It felt stronger than it had only a few minutes ago; but surely he was only imagining this, he decided, as the sea breeze strengthened and the clouds closed off the sun, and then the temperature dropped suddenly, soothingly. A moment later, he forgot the heat.

Next to him, Guinan was silent and seemingly preoccupied with the alien squid.

"Guinan?" Picard asked.

She raised a hand for silence. He waited. Finally she looked at him and said, "I've been listening to some of their stories. They have a lot to tell."

"If they can't survive," Guinan said, "it is their hope to be remembered. I'll remember them."

This then was why Guinan had come in with the Feynman, to remember any beings whom she found here. Nothing more, nothing less than this. It was a piece of nobility to be savored.
