To Dream in the Sea of Sorrows

PICARD STOOD NEAR GUINAN on the south bank of the canal. The first alien squid had swum away, but another had come to rest alongside the bank and gaze up at them with its large eyes as it weaved signs with its tentacles. Guinan knelt on the bank, folding her legs under herself, never looking away from the alien.

Picard suspected that the squid was communicating with Guinan both with its tentacles and with some sort of telepathy. He could not tell if she was replying to the alien somehow or simply listening to what it had to tell her.

Two other squid darted toward them, then fled. "They had a dream," Guinan said softly, "or perhaps I should call it a hope."

"And what was this hope?" Picard asked.

"Space travel. It's an ancient dream for them, Jean-Luc, because they are a very ancient people, so old that their own origins are only distant shadows lost in the past. They were old when your species was young, when my people were young. They do not even have names for themselves, or for their race."

Their silent alien companion slipped under the water and vanished. "Sea swifts," Picard said. Something about these beings reminded him of the small birds he used to see swooping over his family's vineyards in the summers. "We'll make a name of our own for them. I'll call them the sea swifts."

What they really were, and where they came from, he thought, was anybody's guess. It seemed highly doubtful that they could have evolved from the Great Scott Sea all by themselves over the course of a hundred thousand years.

"This Dyson Sphere," he said to Guinan, "is becoming more and more of a puzzle."

"Yes," she said.

"Here's one possibility. This world inside Dyson is some sort of vast cosmic zoo assembled by accident, and our sea swifts are a mere remnant-- maybe pets--from one of the lost civilizations that have presumably been blundering into the Sphere ever since it was abandoned, getting trapped inside with their ships, with no way to get back out again, and therefore continuing, as it were, this great experiment."

"Pets, Jean-Luc?" Guinan asked, with a tone of amusement in her voice.

Picard smiled gently but did not reply.

Suddenly, in the distance, about twenty kilometers away, something bright and shiny broke the surface of the sea. Picard watched as the glittering object grew, swelling until it had become a new island in the chain, an island larger than the Darwin.

He narrowed his eyes and saw then that the new island was only the tip of the alien artifact that had so suddenly appeared. Behind its transparent walls, he could glimpse figures moving.

Guinan got to her feet and hurried toward the-- should he call it a ship? Picard asked himself. He hastened after her, abruptly realizing that all of his smug assumptions about the squid people, the sea swifts, had been entirely mistaken.

CAPTAIN'S LOG, STARSHIP ENTERPRISE

IMPACT MINUS: NO LONGER APPLICABLE SUNSET MINUS: 1-3 DAYS EGRESS: AS SOON AS POSSIBLE

The sea swifts have made an ark for themselves. That was what I saw when their ship rose from the water. They have loaded thousands of their kind inside, along with thousands of exotic animals, two-by-two, inside.

Inside of what?

The . . . "ship" was glittering and transparent and made out of glass. No. Not made out of glass, Guinan pointed out Grown out of glass. It had been built in the shape of a giant starfish with five thick, finger-like legs. No. Not built, Guinan reminded me. It had been grown. Like the glass spicules of certain sponges back home on Earth, or the shell of a nautilus, it had been grown. The inhabitants of the Great Scott Sea were planning their escape inside the skeleton of a giant sea creature.

Guinan was right. They knew a great danger was coming, and had been planning, with great care, a possible escape route for at least some small number of their kind. But it became equally clear to us that their plan could not possibly work. No matter how clever their design, no matter how much thought they applied to the problem, chemical propellants just weren't powerful enough. The starfish would burn nearly a quarter of its fuel during the first fifteen seconds of flight, and though it might by that time be accelerating toward Mach-one, it would also be flying barely thirty meters above the ocean surface. A minute later (assuming it held together that long) we'd be watching its death throes, about ten kilometers overhead.

We had to tell them that their practical engineering could not overcome mathematical certainties. We had no choice. We had to.

From now on, through lift-off, Captain Dalen had decided, all of her crew and all of the personnel with Picard would stay close to the Darwin and on full alert status. By her decree, there would be no further exploration of the islands. She was taking no chances, with billions of desperate, rocket-capable creatures somewhere underfoot and apparently on the move.

The last of the repairs on the Darwin and its shuttles were completed just ahead of the 1700 dinner break, nearly three hours early. More cautious commanders, Dalen supposed as she ate her way through a mass of Federation ceramic foam flavored with a few nuggets of sand and quartz, would have applied those extra hours to an early liftoff and a windfall against the margin of error. But Picard's android officer Data and his first officer Riker had a plan for beaming clusters of pulse engines into the holds of the shuttles Calypso and Nadir, strapping tractor devices to their hulls, and sending them into Dyson uncrewed. The shuttles had become strap-on, robotic engines, hastily modified to give the starfish the added push it so desperately needed.

Captain Dalen, meanwhile, had ordered the Darwin's two lowermost decks to be eaten completely hollow and flooded, providing room for no fewer than two hundred additional refugees. The upper decks would therefore become even more cramped and the water would render the ship as sluggish as an asteroid; but Captain Picard had agreed with Dalen that it was a good plan. Unfortunately, it was impossible to know what Dyson would produce tomorrow, or even during the next hour. Here, Dalen thought as she finished her meal and emerged into one of the ship's recreation areas, a good idea could easily be ruined by surprises that made it impossible to think the whole plan through in advance. Here, she mused as she turned around to look at the new passage she had created, even the best of plans had a way of failing spectacularly.

Within an hour, aliens were filing through a submerged gangway door--two hundred and fifteen of them, filing through in utter silence.

Picard and Guinan watched from the roof of the Darwin, as if they were standing on a beach. "Look there, Jean-Luc," she whispered. "Do you see-- circling beneath the squid?"

He followed her gaze, and alarm ran through him like shock from an overloaded phaser.

"It's--"

"It's harmless," she assured. "It won't hurt them."

But it was a dark, ominous shape--huge and winged. It crossed Darwin's prow, seemingly indifferent to both the squid and the starship.

"Intelligent?" the captain asked.

"In a manner of speaking," said Guinan.

"Which means it understands the danger."

"In a manner of speaking," came the reply.

Its head was at once eaglelike and serpentlike when it broke surface, not more than fifty meters away. Then a neck, more than five meters long, followed it out of the water. The skin, gleaming and dripping, was at once like the skin of a dolphin and like the skin of a machine. Then a pair of wings followed the neck out of the water, flapping fiercely.

At first sight, Picard was certain he was viewing an animal. Then the neck had made him wonder if it might be a machine; but once its body was completely out of the water, he knew it was an animal... he knew this even after a jet engine roared to life under each wing and, stiffening its spine and sucking in air, the creature overflew the porcelain city, then shot through the sound barrier.

Two kilometers away, six more flying fish--he could think of no better name for them--rose from the Great Scott Sea, gathered themselves into nature's rendition of the missing man formation, and winged off in the same direction the first flier had gone.

"You were right," Guinan said. "Evolution has taken some strange turns here."

"Impossible turns," Picard said, and reminded himself again that Great Scott was only a random sample of Dyson, and probably not even the most interesting place in the Sphere.

He shook his head. Even at supersonic speed, the fish had no hope of flying to safety across light minutes of ocean, even if months remained before the sun fell out of the sky. If only he could save just one of those miraculous creatures, he thought.

"It's all degenerating into chaos and blunders," he lamented. "Perhaps the biggest blunders of all time."

"If it helps you at all," Guinan said, "there will be almost no one to judge our actions; and even if there were, they would conclude that there is not much we can do with a structure of this size. We have not caused this situation."

"I wonder," Picard said, knowing that she lived as one of the last witnesses who could judge the Borg for the crime perpetrated against her people, and he wondered if justice might one day flow from her memory of what had happened. He wanted to voice, again, his suspicions about why an all-consuming neutron star should appear, just as the warp ships arrived from Federation space. Was it time for them to keep a new civilization from making use of the artifact? Or was it simply time to destroy a past they had outgrown?

"You judge yourself too harshly," said Guinan. "I've watched your so-called blunder through Dyson, and--"

"And there's nothing for me to do."

"Except what you've already been doing."

"Which is?"

"Shine a little light, Jean-Luc. Save whatever you can. Any step up from nothing is vast."

"Riker here. Are you just about ready to get the Darwin aloft?" Number One, Picard thought, sounded nervous, worried, and impatient. Riker's vocabulary always became more varied and colorful when he was worried. In extreme cases it became bureaucratic, as if he were falling back on his Academy training jargon. He was not there yet, Picard realized, so in Riker's judgment the situation was still potentially manageable.

The glass starfish had sailed, driven by the boosters Geordi and Riker had cobbled together from three of the Enterprise's shuttles. In accordance with their instructions, the Feynman, stripped of life support and crammed with spare parts from the Darwin, was now strapped to the backs of Nadir and Calypso, providing just enough kick, according to Riker, to guarantee that the water-laden vessel could be maneuvered to a safer location--wherever that magic place, safer, might be.

CAPTAIN'S LOG, STARSHIP DARWIN

SUNSET MINUS: 2 OR 3 DAYS, PROBABLY LESS EGRESS: ASAP

It was Commander Riker who came up with the idea of flooding the Darwin's lower decks, to provide us with additional space for evacuation of the "squid people." It seemed a good idea, but I had my doubts about Riker.

"You can trust your life to him," Picard assured me. "He's one of the best officers in Starfleet."

"He is?" I wondered aloud. "I must confess that I've had some doubts about his judgment, having heard that he plays poker with an empath and a card-counting android."

"Precisely my point," the captain said. "They usually lose."

WHEN SHE JOINED Picard on the bridge, Captain Dalen had to force herself to believe what the screens showed. Up there in the far sky, on the Dyson homeworld, a remote probe shivered violently from side to side as a stiff breeze came up, then weakened for a moment, then came on again even more strongly. Its source was the southeast. The open pit mine, with its fractured homes and storefronts, resisted the assault of air and dust... for a minute or two ... for mere minutes, and no more.

From the summit of the western wall, the probe broadcast a shivering, panoramic view through sub-space: a horizon on which an ember from the moon became first a brilliant meteor, and then a fiery sword whose blade reached all the way up to the sky--and whence the ember had come ... a moon-rise unlike any other in Captain Dalen's experience, or in anyone else's.

On the far side, completely out of view, the erratically accelerating inner surface of Dyson had crept up and bitten a piece out of its own prototype.

The lesser Dyson never even touched the ground, never did more than dip into the greater Dyson's stratosphere.. ..but at thirty-two times the speed of sound, a mere dip was enough. The world let wobbled and cracked, smoldered and dragged in its orbit. After more than two hours, it was still flinging sparks and hot coals from the wound. Captain Dalen's probe showed the hull of the moon clearing the Homeworld's horizon .. . and then stopping . .. and then ... instead of rising farther . .. it came forward and sat down on a sea located halfway between the Bronze Age city and its antipode.

Picard, seated on a saddle to the left of Captain Dalen's station, gazed at the bridge viewscreen, transfixed. The most astonishing part was the slowness--the stateliness, even--with which things were unfolding. The moon was collapsing into the world at a steady twenty kilometers per second-- and it took more than a minute and a half for it to disappear. There went the spheres within the sphere, within the Sphere. There went carbon and phosphorus and sulfur: the most abundant substances in the universe realized finally as the pain and promise of living. There went the marionette people. There went spirit.

Meteors.

Meteors and shockwaves everywhere.

And a third part of the city was uprooted, and hurled into the sea. And the waters boiled, and turned to blood. And the city was not.

The Dooglasse ship was more than two light minutes away when the moon collapsed. The aliens were flying with a Federation comlink, but without benefit of their own subspace probes. They were therefore completely mystified by the real-time transmissions between the Enterprise and the Darwin. Though the alien called Captain Dalen was describing for the alien voice named Riker a moon that had crashed and exploded, Jani's telescope revealed a moon still hovering above its world.

Then, as the seconds passed, the Dooglasse saw it, too. The horror developed exactly as the Horta alien had said it would, as if foretold by the gift of prophetic vision.

"Riker to Picard."

"Picard here," the captain said. He had moved to a station on the port side of the Horta's command pit. Troi, sitting near him, was tense with worry.

"Are you lofting yet?" Riker asked.

"Not quite ready, Number One," Picard replied. "Did you record what just happened?"

"Yes, Captain. I advise that you leave while the entrance lock is still intact. I assume it is still functioning."

"We'll know when we get there," said Picard, and he realized that by then the steadily rising tide of chaos might already have ruined the lock mechanism; and there was no other way out of the Sphere. Inertia still held sway over the sun and the Home-world, as another surge forward brought the inner surface closer to each. On Earth, Picard's ancestors had witnessed explosions of lava and steam powerful enough to open cracks forty kilometers long. He knew of a man in the Jordan Valley who, long before the first book of the Bible was written, had seen a mountain pitched on its side, then swallowed whole by a fissure wide enough to accommodate all the tribes of Israel. He had actually seen the man's bones where construction workers had found them, still splayed out in the disquieting pose of startled surprise. He knew of an island that had disappeared in a searing red glare--disappeared so suddenly that men and ships were converted to gas and the waters of the Mediterranean stood up like a wall. .. stood up, in places, higher than the pyramids; and he knew that these manifestations were of but trifling magnitude by comparison to the quakings and burnings that were about to burst upon Dyson.

Selah ... Selah .

RIKER HAD ORDERED Data and the pilot on duty to bring the Enterprise nearly close enough to trigger the lock's external grapplers . . . almost, but not quite close enough. Closing the distance gave him seconds more of breathing space, and he supposed that seconds would make all the difference in the world, if it became necessary for him to repeat the Jenolen maneuver with the Darwin, the Dooglasse ship, and the starfish.

The starfish? Riker wondered. We're going to be cramped. It's likely to get awfully cramped in here before this is all settled.

The Darwin had beamed two probes to the Dyson Homeworld. The first, which dived headlong into the atmosphere, revealed nothing on the Enterprise's bridge screen, nothing except wind-driven dust illuminated by such incessant lightnings that they blended undetectably into a continuous yellow glare.

The view from space was no more revealing. The blue-green dot, with its miniature version of the Great Scott Sea, was now a ghostly dark sphere. As Riker watched from the captain's command station, no snow-capped mountain, no patch of blue ocean, shone through anywhere. The bridge was silent except for the intermittent beeps of their equipment; all of the officers on duty were staring at the view-screen. Riker knew that everyone on the bridge was now feeling inertia's threat more keenly than any screen or sensor could convey. It hung in their minds's sky like a hammer readying to shatter a history.

"Selah," the voice of Captain Dalen intoned. ". . . Will not we fear, though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea; though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah . . . the world melted . . . Selah."

The Horta captain, Riker realized, was recalling the Forty-sixth Psalm. He caught a look of dismay on the face of an officer at his left, then shrugged. An alien archaeologist quoting the Book of Psalms? Well, and why not? Nothing else on this mission had gone as expected.

He feared the possibility of having to bring the Enterprise inside the Sphere; yet he knew that he would do so if the lives of Picard and those with him were endangered . . . and yet he also knew that if going inside meant certain destruction for the ship and its crew, he would pull away and live with the decision as best he could. He was not a stranger to difficult decisions, even where Picard's life was involved.

On the right side of Riker's bridge screen, no voice outfeeds came from the cockpit of the Balboa; but he could see that Worf was double-checking and triple-checking the shuttle's controls, ready to turn the Balboa into a lifeboat if the Darwin itself failed. He knew how his old friend would take the decision that he, himself, now considered and dreaded.

The Klingon did not look up.

Worf knew that more could go wrong in this operation than could be foreseen. Even the indefatigable Data had given no new warnings. He could guess what the android was doing in this dark field tonight: running increasingly intractable probability curves, trying to predict scenarios for failure, trying to predict the unpredictable. The central disaster was beyond the resources of Klingon, or human, or human-appearing android to prevent, even if given every manner of brute strength already known to them; and the Klingon doubted that there was any technology accessible inside the Sphere that could be brought into play in time. He wondered if this time the Enterprise would be forced simply to stand aside and watch what happened, and his warrior's will rebelled against the thought, even as his intellect went on bended knee before the realities.

"Captain Picard," Data called across subspace, "you really should be airborne by now."

"What is it?" Picard replied from the bridge of the Darwin. "Has Great Scott lurched again toward the sun?"

"That too," Data's voice replied, "and something else, far less predictable. The sun is fading toward the red dwarf state. It appears to be dying, sir."

And how will Dyson's sun die? Picard thought.

"Have you been able to beam in the additional observation probes?" Data asked. "Especially the solar probes?"

"They were not a priority," Picard explained. "We've only just now gotten them away. Can you see yet?" He waited for the android's answer.

Data glanced at the forward screen and saw nothing except his own, Enterprise-eye view of the Sphere's outer surface: a level, airless plain that seemed endless. For an instant, he admired the complete lack of wear and tear on Dyson's skin, then cut short the amount of time devoted to the irrelevant. Sometimes, his human tendencies seemed annoying; but to be annoyed was also a human tendency. A rational being would never have even made the irrelevant observation.

"Riker to Picard," the commander said from the captain's station. "No downlink yet from your sun probe. It is--please stand by, sir."

Data watched the screen image brighten to reveal a strange star rushing up from below. Indeed, through the probe's eyes, it now ceased even to resemble a star. No longer sapphire-orange or even sapphire-pink, it glowed with the red of a ruby. Yellow spines sprang out of the corona, appallingly large, and made of plasma. The impression Data received was of a fiery sea urchin dangling in space.

"Got it!" Riker shouted from behind him.

Data checked his display and saw at once, based upon triangulations among four different probes, exactly how far off-center the central sun had been shifted; or more accurately, how much the Sphere had moved, leaving the star in place. This told him more precisely when the sun would reach the Great Scott Sea. It was "falling" faster than he had anticipated.

"Captain," Riker said, "we're getting readings that just don't make sense. The sun is transmitting enormous amounts of energy directly into the Sphere's surface." His voice was more high-pitched than usual, full of what Data recognized as urgency. "I'm looking at a scan of the grapplers, opposite the Great Scott Sea, on the ice fields. The power surges are off the grid. They've got to be fully charged by now. More than fully charged. But they're not doing anything!"

Riker's face was impassive, Troi noted, in the moment before he passed on a probe image to Darwin's bridge screen. She saw a necklace of computer-enhanced grappler fire, burning brightly, accomplishing nothing. From their mountings atop the Darwin's hull, the ship's own probes revealed nothing of the calamity happening in the world above. The sun was completely obscured by a warm haze, and because the screen automatically adjusted the lighting to changing conditions, keeping its level of illumination constant, it was only when Troi looked at the meter and scanner readings that she knew that daylight had increased its brilliance threefold. And Data had said that the sun was shrinking, fading. . .

One of the probes panned across the face of the sun. On its surface, a yellow-white fountain appeared, a new urchin spine, a blaze that streamed out higher than the distance separating Earth from the moon. It hovered for a moment, then came out again--higher, heading purposefully toward the probe. Without any fuss at all, the probe died. Then another probe winked out. Then another.

"That's it," Picard said grimly next to her. "No hope of correcting Dyson's problem. No hope of getting anywhere near that star again."

"That is not entirely true," Data said from the Enterprise. "You are already too close to the star for safety."

"Warning appreciated," the Horta said, with what seemed to Troi to be deep feeling. She sensed no recklessness or fatalism in Dalen now, only grim determination.

From a great distance, a surviving probe near the Dyson Homeworld showed urchin spines flaring erratically, as if the star were signaling to any interlopers:

I KNOW WHAT I'M DOING. STAY AWAY.

Troi wondered if one or more of the civilizations infesting Dyson's walls had managed to wrest control of ancient machinery and create, by accident or by design, the illusion that Dyson and its star were alive, and suffering, and aware. Biological overtones. Superorganism. Troi could not shake off the impression--the stubborn illusion--that Dyson was alive.

As she watched, the probe panned down and across the Dyson Homeworld . . . down and across the inner membrane of Dyson. It was impossible not to look, and just as impossible not to respond irrationally to what the eyes saw. Even Data's rationality, she knew, was being assaulted and slowed. Logic dropped dead for them, dropped dead for all of them, as the sun carried the old world toward the hull.

The planet was ready, in its orbit, to be rolled onto the surface of the Sphere, Picard thought. One side of his mind warred with the other, wanting to drag him away from this place. The other side held him spellbound, for there was something fascinatingly violent and dreadfully beautiful in Dyson's agonies. The place was uplifting and utterly humiliating, horrifying and deliciously obscene. He freed himself by breaking the scene down into mathematics and physics. A mental gag order, self-imposed. It was the only way.

"Will the planet actually roll?" he asked Data. "Or do you suppose it will go through the Sphere? Can you predict what will happen?"

"I am already running simulations, Captain, but I am certain that inertia will continue to hold sway. The planet may not roll easily on the land mass."

Another view came on-screen. Racing ahead of the old world, glancing back over its shoulder as it retreated, one of the Darwin's probes showed the first collisions of atmosphere against atmosphere, water against water. Here and there, microscopic shock bubbles focused hydrogen upon hydrogen and blazed forth as fusion--a billion twinkling points of fusion. Had the computer not automatically filtered out the glare, no one would have been able to see, much less understand, what happened next.

First on the upper hemisphere, then all across the old Homeworld, the atmosphere was lifted and slung forward, meaning that the planet itself was being slowed by friction, meaning that anything not solidly nailed down, including air and water and perhaps a continent or two, was being uprooted by the law of inertia, and would continue forward.

"It will roll," Data said, knowing this for a certainty now. From his station on the Enterprise's bridge, he saw that the Sphere was holding up well against the old world as it scraped across desert, and forest, and lake. On the outer shell, a fierce lightning storm followed the scrape, a migrating spider's web of bolts spreading out over thousands of kilometers, and capable of electrocuting whole worlds full of people. They were the only outwardly visible sign of the impact. The concussions of light grew successively brighter as Data watched, and their westward migration slowed perceptibly.

The view from the Darwin's fleeing probe confirmed for Picard that the Homeworld was indeed lagging behind, requiring the probe to depend more and more upon telescopically enhanced views, with a correspondingly decreasing resolution. But even as the view began to blur, there was much to see-- almost too much to take in all at once.

As the Homeworld grazed a lake, its lower hemisphere, more and more of it, was disappearing. And ahead of that hemisphere, Picard knew, no living creatures stirred upon the lake. The forward-flung atmosphere had piled up ahead of the planet and was crashing down upon the sea, setting the very air afire. The shock front of ejected air, and water, and continental dust rolled ashore and kept on rolling toward the eyes of the probe, deforesting a super continent before it, too, began losing speed... and then the Homeworld itself came ashore. Into space was lifted a mighty whirl of fragmenting, liquefying land. From the place where Picard and Jani had viewed an alien Bronze Age city, gigatons of up-thrown rock were being converted into beads of glass. They scattered across the sky like billions of glittering diamonds.

And there were diamonds in the sky, Picard realized. The timbers of the old boat at the bottom of the Horta tunnel, the bones in the old house-- they were microdiamonds, now. And as he watched, he knew that the diamonds themselves must presently be bursting into flame and vanishing in puffs of carbon dioxide.

And he beheld a crack in the planet, a crack that ran from the lower hemisphere's contact point with Dyson's inner hull, all the way to the roof of the Homeworld's upper hemisphere. More cracks appeared as he watched. They spread out from the center of the nearer hemisphere, yawning wide and filling with fire, and appearing with such suddenness that Picard wondered if it was possible for shock-waves traveling through rock to cover so much ground so quickly.

It did not seem possible; but the old Homeworld did not know any better, so the cracks spread and multiplied anyway, and then the very hemisphere bulged and stretched, tried to roll, and stretched again before his eyes.

"Selah . . ." Captain Dalen sang.

She called that one right, Picard told himself. Moses' miracle of the waters, Plato's lost Atlantis, John's Revelation--even these wonders were reduced to minutiae by the approach of Dyson's Homeworld. Its mantle seemed to be parting and peeling away like the skin of an orange, but it only seemed so. For it was stony and brittle. It was actually an ejecta blanket of dust and red sparks and steam. Beneath the spreading blanket, something globular and huge fell out of the world, registering, as it fell, barely perceptible but distinctive Doppler shifts on the probe's sensors.

"It is definitely rolling," Data called out from the Enterprise.

"What is?" Picard asked. "What's left to roll?"

"What falls away, Captain. Scans indicate a ball of nickel and iron."

"Then the world has spilled its core," Captain Dalen observed.

"Yes," said Data. "Just as the mantle shook off its atmosphere and continents, the core has now shed its mantle."

The maddening scale of events and the relentless, slow motion pace with which events seemed to be unfolding, had a hypnotic quality, even, Data admitted to himself, for him. The fleeing probe was still outpacing the globe by a wide margin. Its sensors were still piercing smoke and lava and steam, reconstructing, on the Enterprise's bridge screen, a bright orange globe so vast and so real that Data could almost reach out and touch it. The metal core did not shatter as it stretched toward him across the sky. It rolled. He no longer needed the Doppler readouts to tell him this: The globe was definitely rolling-- and it seemed that it would roll through the screen and crush everyone on the bridge.

With the old Homeworld down, "sunset" was not far behind. Captain Picard was all too aware of that. For him and his Horta colleague Dalen, only considerations of survival remained--for their crew, and for the the sea swifts on E-Deck aft, who were now pulling the hatch closed behind themselves and saying good-bye to fathers and mothers and siblings and comrades for the last time.

There was no stopping the sun. All the courage and wisdom accumulated during the course of Pi-card's lifetime were being challenged by the onrush-ing mass. It humbled him with no effort at all. In the end, Picard knew, only the Darwin, the Dooglasse ship, and the starfish would be his concern; nothing else was possible.

After "sunset" would come Dyson's long night--a sunless abyss filled with ice. A great nobility was dying all around him, even if it had been sculpted by the ancestral Borg in the remote past; and the great tragedy within the larger tragedy was that the expedition would return home with little more than scraps of knowledge by which to read the story of Dyson's many lost worlds--if, in fact, they ever returned home.

Seconds--minutes after they should have left by Picard's reckoning, Captain Dalen ordered one of the surviving probes to gather the last of its power into one intensely focused scan. A fragment of planetary crust, no wider than the city of San Francisco, was tumbling end over end through void. The probe peered through rafts of molten black glass that had, only minutes before, been layers of sedimentary rock. Like blades of grass preserved in amber, the glass enclosed long, long girders: segments of a monorail system. The train was nowhere to be seen, but at one end of the system, a labyrinth of iron bars glowed white-hot.

"Jail cells?" Troi said in wonderment.

"No," said Picard, "a zoo!" And for a moment, and then for another, the captain of the Enterprise began to understand the Horta captain's need to finish the task at hand, to solve one puzzle before moving onto the next. The screens showed a sudden movement forward and starboard. As far as the eye could see, a thick white vapor was rising off the sea, rising only waist-high. In the direction of the islands, the vapor rose skyward in a dozen whirlwinds, and the black clouds gathering on the horizon provided a stark contrast for them. The sky, in that direction, appeared to be full of ghostly white worms.

"Now would be a good time to leave?" said the Horta.

"Another good safety tip," said Picard, as five kilometers off the starboard bow a waterspout twisted sideways and tore a hole in the canopy of cloud cover, letting brilliant red sunlight shine down, ever so briefly, on the porcelain city. It was the last these islands would ever see of the sun, until the moment it climbed down through the stratosphere and sat upon them.
